PREFACE: DESCENSUS AD INFEROS

Something we cannot see protects us from something we do not understand. The thing we cannot see is
culture, in its intrapsychic or internal manifestation. The thing we do not understand is the chaos that gave
rise to culture. If the structure of culture is disrupted, unwittingly, chaos returns. We will do anything -
anything - to defend ourselves against that return.
"... the very fact that a general problem has gripped and assimilated the whole of a person is a guarantee
that the speaker has really experienced it, and perhaps gained something from his sufferings. He will then
reflect the problem for us in his personal life and thereby show us a truth." 1
I was raised under the protective auspices, so to speak, of the Christian Church. This does not mean that my
family was explicitly religious. I attended conservative Protestant services during childhood with my
mother, but she was not a dogmatic or authoritarian believer, and we never discussed religious issues at
home. My father appeared essentially agnostic, at least in the traditional sense. He refused to even set foot
in a church, except during weddings and funerals. Nonetheless, the historical remnants of Christian
morality permeated our household, conditioning our expectations and interpersonal responses, in the most
intimate of manners. When I grew up, after all, most people still attended church; furthermore, all the rules
and expectations that made up middle-class society were Judeo-Christian in nature. Even the increasing
number of those who could not tolerate formal ritual and belief still implicitly accepted - still acted out -
the rules that made up the Christian game.
When I was twelve or so my mother enrolled me in confirmation classes, which served as introduction
to adult membership in the Church. I did not like attending. I did not like the attitude of my overtly
religious classmates (who were few in number), and did not desire their lack of social standing. I did not
like the school-like atmosphere of the confirmation classes. More importantly, however, I could not
swallow what I was being taught. I asked the minister, at one point, how he reconciled the story of Genesis
with the creation theories of modern science. He had not undertaken such a reconciliation; furthermore, he
seemed more convinced, in his heart, of the evolutionary viewpoint. I was looking for an excuse to leave,
anyway - and that was the last straw. Religion was for the ignorant, weak and superstitious. I stopped
attending church, and joined the modern world.
Although I had grown up in a "Christian" environment - and had a successful and happy childhood, in
at least partial consequence - I was more than willing to throw aside the structure that had fostered me. No
one really opposed my rebellious efforts, either, in church or at home - in part because those who were
deeply religious (or who might have wanted to be) had no intellectually acceptable counter-arguments at
their disposal. After all, many of the basic tenets of Christian belief were incomprehensible, if not clearly
absurd. The virgin birth was an impossibility; likewise, the notion that someone could rise from the dead.
Did my act of rebellion precipitate a familial or a social crisis? No. My actions were so predictable, in a
sense, that they upset no one, with the exception of my mother (and even she was soon resigned to the
inevitable). The other members of the church - my "community" - had become absolutely habituated to the
increasingly-frequent act of defection, and did not even notice.
Did my act of rebellion upset me, personally? Only in a manner I was not able to perceive, until many
years later. I developed a premature concern with large-scale political and social issues, at about the same
time I quit attending church. Why were some countries, some people, rich, happy and successful, while
others were doomed to misery? Why were the forces of NATO and the Soviet Union continually at each
other's throats? How was it possible for people to act the way the Nazis had, during World War Two?
Underlying these specific considerations was a broader, but at the time ill-conceptualized question: how did
evil - particularly group-fostered evil - come to play its role in the world?
I abandoned the traditions that supported me, at about the same time I left childhood. This meant that I
had no broader socially constructed "philosophy" at hand, to aid my understanding, as I became aware of
the existential problems that accompany maturity. The final consequences of that lack took years to become
7 









fully manifest. In the meantime, however, my nascent concern with questions of moral justice found
immediate resolution. I started working as a volunteer for a mildly socialist political party, and adopted the
party line.
Economic injustice was at the root of all evil, as far as I was concerned. Such injustice could be
rectified, as a consequence of the re-arrangement of social organizations. I could play a part in that
admirable revolution, carrying out my ideological beliefs. Doubt vanished; my role was clear. Looking
back, I am amazed at how stereotypical my actions - reactions - really were. I could not rationally accept
the premises of religion - not as I understood them. I turned, in consequence, to dreams of political utopia,
and personal power. The same ideological trap caught millions of others, in recent centuries - caught and
killed millions.
When I was seventeen I left the town I grew up in. I moved nearby and attended a small college, which
offered the first two years of undergraduate education. I involved myself there in university politics -
which were more-or-less left wing at that time - and was elected to the college board of governors. The
board was composed of politically and ideologically conservative people: lawyers, doctors, and
businessmen. They were all well (or at least practically) educated, pragmatic, confident, outspoken; they
had all accomplished something worthwhile and difficult. I could not help but admire them, even though I
did not share their political stance. I found the fact of my admiration unsettling.
I had attended several left-wing party congresses, as a student politician and active party-worker. I
hoped to emulate the socialist leaders. The left wing had a long and honorable history in Canada, and
attracted some truly competent and caring people. However, I could not generate much respect for the
numerous low-level party activists I encountered at these meetings. They seemed to live to complain: had
no career, frequently; no family, no completed education - nothing but ideology. They were peevish,
irritable, and little, in every sense of the word. I was faced, in consequence, with the mirror image of the
problem I encountered on the college board: I could not admire many of the individuals who believed the
same things I did. This additional complication furthered my existential confusion.
My college roommate, an insightful cynic, expressed skepticism regarding my ideological beliefs. He
told me that the world could not be completely encapsulated within the boundaries of socialist philosophy. I
had more or less come to this conclusion on my own, but had not admitted so much in words. Soon
afterward, however, I read George Orwell's Road to Wigan Pier. This book finally undermined me - not
only my socialist ideology, but my faith in ideological stances themselves. In the famous essay concluding
that book (written for - and much to the dismay of - the British Left Book Club) Orwell described the great
flaw of socialism, and the reason for its frequent failure to attract and maintain democratic power (at least
in Britain). Orwell said, essentially, that socialists did not really like the poor. They merely hated the rich.2
His idea struck home instantly. Socialist ideology served to mask resentment and hatred, bred by failure.
Many of the party activists I had encountered were using the ideals of social justice, to rationalize their
pursuit of personal revenge.
Whose fault was it, that I was poor or uneducated and unadmired? Obviously - the fault of the rich,
well-schooled and respected. How convenient, then, that the demands of revenge and abstract justice
dovetailed! It was only right to obtain recompense from those more fortunate than me.
Of course, my socialist colleagues and I weren't out to hurt anyone - quite the reverse. We were out to
improve things - but we were going to start with other people. I came to see the temptation in this logic, the
obvious flaw, the danger - but could also see that it did not exclusively characterize socialism. Anyone who
was out to change the world by changing others was to be regarded with suspicion. The temptations of such
a position were too great to be resisted.
It was not socialist ideology that posed the problem, then - but ideology, as such. Ideology divided the
world up simplistically into those who thought and acted properly, and those who did not. Ideology enabled
the believer to hide from his own unpleasant and inadmissible fantasies and wishes. Such realizations upset
my beliefs (even my faith in beliefs), and the plans I had formulated, as a consequence of these beliefs. I
could no longer tell who was good and who was bad, so to speak - I no longer knew who to support, or
who to fight. This state of affairs proved very troublesome, pragmatically as well as philosophically. I
wanted to become a corporate lawyer - had written the Law School Admissions Test, had taken two years
of appropriate preliminary courses. I wanted to learn the ways of my enemies, and embark on a political
8 







career. This plan disintegrated. The world obviously did not need another lawyer, and I no longer believed
that I knew enough to masquerade as a leader.
I became simultaneously disenchanted with the study of political science, my original undergraduate
major. I had adopted that discipline so I could learn more about the structure of human beliefs (and for the
practical, career-oriented reasons described previously). It remained very interesting to me when I was at
junior college, where I was introduced to the history of political philosophy. When I moved to the main
campus at the University of Alberta, however, my interest disappeared.. I was taught that people were
motivated by rational forces; that human beliefs and actions were determined by economic pressures. This
did not seem sufficient explanation. I could not believe (and still do not) that commodities - "natural
resources," for example - had intrinsic and self-evident value. In the absence of such value, the worth of
things had to be socially or culturally (or even individually) determined. This act of determination appeared
to me moral - appeared to me to be a consequence of the moral philosophy adopted by the society, culture
or person in question. What people valued, economically, merely reflected what they believed to be
important. This meant that real motivation had to lie in the domain of value, of morality. The political
scientists I studied with did not see this, or did not think it was relevant.
My religious convictions, ill-formed to begin with, disappeared when I was very young. My confidence
in socialism (that is, in political utopia) vanished when I realized that the world was not merely a place of
economics. My faith in ideology departed, when I began to see that ideological identification itself posed a
profound and mysterious problem. I could not accept the theoretical explanations my chosen field of study
had to offer, and no longer had any practical reasons to continue in my original direction. I finished my
three-year bachelor's degree, and left university. All my beliefs - which had lent order to the chaos of my
existence, at least temporarily - had proved illusory; I could no longer see the sense in things. I was cast
adrift; I did not know what to do, or what to think.
But what of others? Was there evidence anywhere that the problems I now faced had been solved, by
anyone, in any acceptable manner? The customary behavior and attitudes of my friends and family
members offered no solution. The people I knew well were no more resolutely goal-directed or satisfied
than I was. Their beliefs and modes of being seemed merely to disguise frequent doubt and profound
disquietude. More disturbingly, on the more general plane, something truly insane was taking place. The
great societies of the world were feverishly constructing a nuclear machine, with unimaginably destructive
capabilities. Someone or something was making terrible plans. Why? Theoretically normal and welladapted
people were going about their business prosaically, as if nothing were the matter. Why weren't
they disturbed? Weren't they paying attention? Wasn't I?
My concern with the general social and political insanity and evil of the world - sublimated by
temporary infatuation with utopian socialism and political machination - returned with a vengeance. The
mysterious fact of the cold war increasingly occupied the forefront of my consciousness. How could things
have come to such a point?
History is just a madhouse
it's turned over all the stones
and its very careful reading
leaves you little that's unknown
I couldn't understand the nuclear race: what could possibly be worth risking annihilation - not merely of
the present, but of the past and the future? What could possibly justify the threat of total destruction?
Bereft of solutions, I had at least been granted the gift of a problem.
I returned to university and began to study psychology. I visited a maximum security prison on the
outskirts of Edmonton, under the supervision of an eccentric adjunct professor at the University of Alberta.
His primary job was the psychological care of convicts. The prison was full of murderers, rapists, and
armed robbers. I ended up in the gym, near the weight room, on my first reconnaissance. I was wearing a
long wool cape, circa 1890, which I had bought in Portugal, and a pair of tall leather boots. The
psychologist who was accompanying me disappeared, unexpectedly, and left me alone. Soon I was
surrounded by shoddy men, some of whom were extremely large and tough-looking. One in particular
stands out in my memory. He was exceptionally muscular, and tattooed over his bare chest. He had a
9 








vicious scar running down the middle of his body, from his collarbone to his midsection. Maybe he had
survived open-heart surgery. Or maybe it was an ax wound. The injury would have killed a lesser man,
anyway - someone like me.
Some of the prisoners, who weren't dressed particularly well, offered to trade their clothes for mine.
This did not strike me as a great bargain, but I wasn't sure how to refuse. Fate rescued me, in the form of a
short, skinny, bearded man. He came up to me - said that the psychologist had sent him - and asked me to
accompany him. He was only one person, and many others (much larger) currently surrounded me and my
cape. So I took him at his word. He led me outside the gym doors, and out into the prison yard, talking
quietly but reasonably about something innocuous (I don't recall what) all the while. I kept glancing back
hopefully at the open doors behind us as we got further and further away. Finally my supervisor appeared,
and motioned me back. We left the bearded prisoner, and went to a private office. The psychologist told me
that the harmless-appearing little man who had escorted me out of the gym had murdered two policemen, in
cold blood, after he had forced them to dig their own graves. One of the policemen had little children, and
had begged for his life, on their behalf, while he was digging - at least according to the murderer's own
testimony.
This really shocked me.
I had read about this sort of event, of course - but it had never been made real for me. I had never met
someone even tangentially affected by something like this; had certainly not encountered anyone who had
actually done something so terrible. How could the man I had talked to - who was so apparently normal
(and so seemingly inconsequential) - have done such an awful thing?
Some of the courses I was attending at this time were taught in large lecture theaters, where the students
were seated in descending rows, row after row. In one of these courses - Introduction to Clinical
Psychology, appropriately enough - I experienced a recurrent compulsion. I would take my seat behind
some unwitting individual and listen to the professor speak. At some point during the lecture, I would
unfailingly feel the urge to stab the point of my pen into the neck of the person in front of me. This impulse
was not overwhelming - luckily - but it was powerful enough to disturb me. What sort of terrible person
would have an impulse like that? Not me. I had never been aggressive. I had been smaller and younger than
my classmates, for most of my life.
I went back to the prison, a month or so after my first visit. During my absence, two prisoners had
attacked a third, a suspected informer. They held or tied him down and pulverized one of his legs with a
lead pipe. I was taken aback, once again, but this time I tried something different. I tried to imagine, really
imagine, what I would have to be like to do such a thing. I concentrated on this task for days and days - and
experienced a frightening revelation. The truly appalling aspect of such atrocity did not lie in its
impossibility or remoteness, as I had naively assumed, but in its ease. I was not much different from the
violent prisoners - not qualitatively different. I could do what they could do (although I hadn't).
This discovery truly upset me. I was not who I thought I was. Surprisingly, however, the desire to stab
someone with my pen disappeared. In retrospect, I would say that the behavioral urge had manifested itself
in explicit knowledge - had been translated from emotion and image to concrete realization - and had no
further "reason" to exist. The "impulse" had only occurred, because of the question I was attempting to
answer: "how can men do terrible things to one another?" I meant other men, of course - bad men - but I
had still asked the question. There was no reason for me to assume that I would receive a predictable or
personally meaningless answer.
At the same time, something odd was happening to my ability to converse. I had always enjoyed
engaging in arguments, regardless of topic. I regarded them as a sort of game (not that this is in any way
unique). Suddenly, however, I couldn't talk - more accurately, I couldn't stand listening to myself talk. I
started to hear a "voice" inside my head, commenting on my opinions. Every time I said something, it said
something - something critical. The voice employed a standard refrain, delivered in a somewhat bored and
matter-of-fact tone:
You don't believe that.
That isn't true.
You don't believe that.
That isn't true.
10 






The "voice" applied such comments to almost every phrase I spoke.
I couldn't understand what to make of this. I knew the source of the commentary was part of me - I
wasn't schizophrenic - but this knowledge only increased my confusion. Which part, precisely, was me -
the talking part, or the criticizing part? If it was the talking part, then what was the criticizing part? If it
was the criticizing part - well, then: how could virtually everything I said be untrue? In my ignorance and
confusion, I decided to experiment. I tried only to say things that my internal reviewer would pass
unchallenged. This meant that I really had to listen to what I was saying, that I spoke much less often, and
that I would frequently stop, midway through a sentence, feel embarrassed, and reformulate my thoughts. I
soon noticed that I felt much less agitated and more confident when I only said things that the "voice" did
not object to. This came as a definite relief. My experiment had been a success; I was the criticizing part.
Nonetheless, it took me a long time to reconcile myself to the idea that almost all my thoughts weren't real,
weren't true - or, at least, weren't mine.
All the things I "believed" were things I thought sounded good, admirable, respectable, courageous.
They weren't my things, however - I had stolen them. Most of them I had taken from books. Having
"understood" them, abstractly, I presumed I had a right to them - presumed that I could adopt them, as if
they were mine: presumed that they were me. My head was stuffed full of the ideas of others; stuffed full of
arguments I could not logically refute. I did not know then that an irrefutable argument is not necessarily
true, nor that the right to identify with certain ideas had to be earned.
I read something by Carl Jung, at about this point, that helped me understand what I was experiencing. It
was Jung who formulated the concept of persona: the mask that "feigned individuality."
 Adoption of such
a mask, according to Jung, allowed each of us - and those around us - to believe that we were authentic.
Jung said:
"When we analyse the persona we strip off the mask, and discover that what seemed to be individual is
at bottom collective; in other words, that the persona was only a mask of the collective psyche.
Fundamentally the persona is nothing real: it is a compromise between individual and society as to what
a man should appear to be. He takes a name, earns a title, exercises a function, he is this or that. In a
certain sense all this is real, yet in relation to the essential individuality of the person concerned it is only
a secondary reality, a compromise formation, in making which others often have a greater share than he.
The persona is a semblance, a two-dimensional reality, to give it a nickname."4
Despite my verbal facility, I was not real. I found this painful to admit.
I began to dream absolutely unbearable dreams. My dream life, up to this point, had been relatively
uneventful, as far as I can remember; furthermore, I have never had a particularly good visual imagination.
Nonetheless, my dreams became so horrible and so emotionally gripping that I was often afraid to go to
sleep. I dreamt dreams vivid as reality. I could not escape from them or ignore them. They centered, in
general, around a single theme: that of nuclear war, and total devastation - around the worst evils that I, or
something in me, could imagine:
My parents lived in a standard ranch style house, in a middle-class neighborhood, in a small town in
northern Alberta. I was sitting in the darkened basement of this house, in the family room, watching TV,
with my cousin Diane, who was in truth - in waking life - the most beautiful woman I had ever seen. A
newscaster suddenly interrupted the program. The television picture and sound distorted, and static
filled the screen. My cousin stood up and went behind the TV to check the electrical cord. She touched
it, and started convulsing and frothing at the mouth, frozen upright by intense current.
A brilliant flash of light from a small window flooded the basement. I rushed upstairs. There was
nothing left of the ground floor of the house. It had been completely and cleanly sheared away, leaving
only the floor, which now served the basement as a roof. Red and orange flames filled the sky, from
horizon to horizon. Nothing was left as far as I could see, except skeletal black ruins sticking up here
and there: no houses, no trees, no signs of other human beings or of any life whatsoever. The entire
town and everything that surrounded it on the flat prairie had been completely obliterated.
It started to rain mud, heavily. The mud blotted out everything, and left the earth brown, wet, flat and
dull, and the sky leaden, even grey. A few distraught and shell-shocked people started to gather
11 






together. They were carrying unlabelled and dented cans of food, which contained nothing but mush and
vegetables. They stood in the mud looking exhausted and disheveled. Some dogs emerged, out from
under the basement stairs, where they had inexplicably taken residence. They were standing upright, on
their hind legs. They were thin, like greyhounds, and had pointed noses. They looked like creatures of
ritual - like Anubis, from the Egyptian tombs. They were carrying plates in front of them, which
contained pieces of seared meat. They wanted to trade the meat for the cans. I took a plate. In the center
of it was a circular slab of flesh four inches in diameter and one inch thick, foully cooked, oily, with a
marrow bone in the center of it. Where did it come from?
I had a terrible thought. I rushed downstairs to my cousin. The dogs had butchered her, and were
offering the meat to the survivors of the disaster. I woke up with my heart pounding.
I dreamed apocalyptic dreams of this intensity two or three times a week for a year or more, while I
attended university classes and worked - as if nothing out of the ordinary was going on in my mind.
Something I had no familiarity with was happening, however. I was being affected, simultaneously, by
events on two "planes." On the first plane were the normal, predictable, everyday occurrences that I shared
with everybody else. On the second plane, however (unique to me, or so I thought) existed dreadful images
and unbearably intense emotional states. This idiosyncratic, subjective world - which everyone normally
treated as illusory - seemed to me at that time to lie somehow behind the world everyone knew and
regarded as real. But what did real mean? The closer I looked, the less comprehensible things became.
Where was the real? What was at the bottom of it all? I did not feel I could live without knowing.
My interest in the cold war transformed itself into a true obsession. I thought about the suicidal and
murderous preparation of that war every minute of every day, from the moment I woke up until the second
I went to bed. How could such a state of affairs come about? Who was responsible?
I dreamed that I was running through a mall parking lot, trying to escape from something. I was
running through the parked cars, opening one door, crawling across the front seat, opening the other,
moving to the next. The doors on one car suddenly slammed shut. I was in the passenger seat. The car
started to move by itself. A voice said harshly, "there is no way out of here." I was on a journey, going
somewhere I did not want to go. I was not the driver.
I became very depressed and anxious. I had vaguely suicidal thoughts, but mostly wished that everything
would just go away. I wanted to lay down on my couch, and sink into it, literally, until only my nose was
showing - like the snorkel of a diver above the surface of the water. I found my awareness of things
unbearable.
I came home late one night from a college drinking party, self-disgusted and angry. I took a canvas
board and some paints. I sketched a harsh, crude picture of a crucified Christ - glaring and demonic - with
a cobra wrapped around his naked waist, like a belt. The picture disturbed me - struck me, despite my
agnosticism, as sacrilegious. I did not know what it meant, however, or why I had painted it. Where in the
world had it come from?5
 I hadn't paid any attention to religious ideas for years. I hid the painting under
some old clothes in my closet and sat cross-legged on the floor. I put my head down. It became obvious to
me at that moment that I had not developed any real understanding of myself or of others. Everything I had
once believed about the nature of society and myself had proved false, the world had apparently gone
insane, and something strange and frightening was happening in my head. James Joyce said, "History is a
nightmare from which I am trying to awake."6
 For me, history literally was a nightmare. I wanted above all
else at that moment to wake up, and make my terrible dreams go away.
I have been trying ever since then to make sense of the human capacity, my capacity, for evil -
particularly for those evils associated with belief. I started by trying to make sense of my dreams. I couldn't
ignore them, after all. Perhaps they were trying to tell me something? I had nothing to lose by admitting the
possibility. I read Freud's Interpretation of Dreams, and found it useful. Freud at least took the topic
seriously - but I could not regard my nightmares as wish-fulfillments. Furthermore, they seemed more
religious than sexual in nature. I knew, vaguely, that Jung had developed specialized knowledge of myth
and religion, so I started through his writings. His thinking was granted little credence by the academics I
knew - but they weren't particularly concerned with dreams. I couldn't help being concerned by mine.
12 




They were so intense I thought they might derange me. (What was the alternative? To believe that the
terrors and pains they caused me were not real? Nothing is more real than terror and pain.)
Much of the time I could not understand what Jung was getting at. He was making a point I could not
grasp; speaking a language I did not comprehend. Now and then, however, his statements struck home. He
offered this observation, for example:
"It must be admitted that the archetypal contents of the collective unconscious can often assume
grotesque and horrible forms in dreams and fantasies, so that even the most hard-boiled rationalist is not
immune from shattering nightmares and haunting fears."
The second part of that statement certainly seemed applicable to me, although the first ('the archetypal
contents of the collective unconscious") remained mysterious and obscure. Still, this was promising. Jung
at least recognized that the things that were happening to me could happen. Furthermore, he offered some
hints as to their cause. So I kept reading. I soon came across the following hypothesis. Here was a potential
solution to the problems I was facing - or at least the description of a place to look for such a solution:
"The psychological elucidation of... [dream and fantasy] images, which cannot be passed over in silence
or blindly ignored, leads logically into the depths of religious phenomenology. The history of religion in
its widest sense (including therefore mythology, folklore, and primitive psychology) is a treasure-house
of archetypal forms from which the doctor can draw helpful parallels and enlightening comparisons for
the purpose of calming and clarifying a consciousness that is all at sea. It is absolutely necessary to
supply these fantastic images that rise up so strange and threatening before the mind's eye with some
kind of context so as to make them more intelligible. Experience has shown that the best way to do this
is by means of comparative mythological material."
It has in fact been the study of "comparative mythological material" that made my horrible dreams
disappear. The "cure" wrought by this study, however, was purchased at the price of complete and often
painful transformation: what I believe about the world, now - and how I act, in consequence - is so much
at variance with what I believed when I was younger that I might as well be a completely different person.
I discovered that beliefs make the world, in a very real way - that beliefs are the world, in a more than
metaphysical sense. This "discovery" has not turned me into a moral relativist, however: quite the contrary.
I have become convinced that the world-that-is-belief is orderly: that there are universal moral absolutes
(although these are structured such that a diverse range of human opinion remains both possible and
beneficial). I believe that individuals and societies who flout these absolutes - in ignorance or in willful
opposition - are doomed to misery and eventual dissolution.
I learned that the meanings of the most profound substrata of belief systems can be rendered explicitly
comprehensible, even to the skeptical rational thinker - and that, so rendered, can be experienced as
fascinating, profound and necessary. I learned why people wage war - why the desire to maintain, protect
and expand the domain of belief motivates even the most incomprehensible acts of group-fostered
oppression and cruelty - and what might be done to ameliorate this tendency, despite its universality. I
learned, finally, that the terrible aspect of life might actually be a necessary precondition for the existence
of life - and that it is possible to regard that precondition, in consequence, as comprehensible and
acceptable. I hope that I can bring those who read this book to the same conclusions, without demanding
any unreasonable "suspension of critical judgment" - excepting that necessary to initially encounter and
consider the arguments I present. These can be summarized as follows:
The world can be validly construed as a forum for action, as well as a place of things. We describe the
world as a place of things, using the formal methods of science. The techniques of narrative, however -
myth, literature, and drama - portray the world as a forum for action. The two forms of representation
have been unnecessarily set at odds, because we have not yet formed a clear picture of their respective
domains. The domain of the former is the "objective world" - what is, from the perspective of
intersubjective perception. The domain of the latter is "the world of value" - what is and what should be,
from the perspective of emotion and action.
13 





The world as forum for action is "composed," essentially, of three constituent elements, which tend to
manifest themselves in typical patterns of metaphoric representation. First is unexplored territory - the
Great Mother, nature, creative and destructive, source and final resting place of all determinate things.
Second is explored territory - the Great Father, culture, protective and tyrannical, cumulative ancestral
wisdom. Third is the process that mediates between unexplored and explored territory - the Divine Son, the
archetypal individual, creative exploratory "Word" and vengeful adversary. We are adapted to this "world
of divine characters," much as the "objective world." The fact of this adaptation implies that the
environment is in "reality" a forum for action, as well as a place of things.
Unprotected exposure to unexplored territory produces fear. The individual is protected from such fear
as a consequence of "ritual imitation of the Great Father" - as a consequence of the adoption of group
identity, which restricts the meaning of things, and confers predictability on social interactions. When
identification with the group is made absolute, however - when everything has to be controlled, when the
unknown is no longer allowed to exist - the creative exploratory process that updates the group can no
longer manifest itself. This "restriction of adaptive capacity" dramatically increases the probability of
social aggression and chaos.
Rejection of the unknown is tantamount to "identification with the devil," the mythological counterpart
and eternal adversary of the world-creating exploratory hero. Such rejection and identification is a
consequence of Luciferian pride, which states: all that I know is all that is necessary to know. This pride is
totalitarian assumption of omniscience - is adoption of "God's place" by "reason" - is something that
inevitably generates a state of personal and social being indistinguishable from hell. This hell develops
because creative exploration - impossible, without (humble) acknowledgment of the unknown - constitutes
the process that constructs and maintains the protective adaptive structure that gives life much of its
acceptable meaning.
"Identification with the devil" amplifies the dangers inherent in group identification, which tends of its
own accord towards pathological stultification. Loyalty to personal interest - subjective meaning - can
serve as an antidote to the overwhelming temptation constantly posed by the possibility of denying
anomaly. Personal interest - subjective meaning - reveals itself at the juncture of explored and unexplored
territory, and is indicative of participation in the process that ensures continued healthy individual and
societal adaptation.
Loyalty to personal interest is equivalent to identification with the archetypal hero - the "savior" - who
upholds his association with the creative "Word" in the face of death, and in spite of group pressure to
conform. Identification with the hero serves to decrease the unbearable motivational valence of the
unknown; furthermore, provides the individual with a standpoint that simultaneously transcends and
maintains the group.
Similar summaries precede each chapter and subchapter. Read as a unit, they comprise a complete but
compressed "picture" of the book. These should be read first, after this preface. In this manner, the whole
of the argument I am offering might come quickly to aid comprehension of the parts.
14 






CHAPTER 1: MAPS OF EXPERIENCE: OBJECT AND MEANING

The world can be validly construed as forum for action, or as place of things.
The former manner of interpretation - more primordial, and less clearly understood - finds its
expression in the arts or humanities, in ritual, drama, literature, and mythology. The world as forum for
action is a place of value, a place where all things have meaning. This meaning, which is shaped as a
consequence of social interaction, is implication for action, or - at a higher level of analysis - implication
for the configuration of the interpretive schema that produces or guides action.
The latter manner of interpretation - the world as place of things - finds its formal expression in the
methods and theories of science. Science allows for increasingly precise determination of the consensuallyvalidatable
properties of things, and for efficient utilization of precisely-determined things as tools (once
the direction such use is to take has been determined, through application of more fundamental narrative
processes).
No complete world-picture can be generated, without use of both modes of construal. The fact that one
mode is generally set at odds with the other means only that the nature of their respective domains remains
insufficiently discriminated. Adherents of the mythological world-view tend to regard the statements of
their creeds as indistinguishable from empirical "fact," even though such statements were generally
formulated long before the notion of objective reality emerged. Those who, by contrast, accept the scientific
perspective - who assume that it is, or might become, complete - forget that an impassable gulf currently
divides what is from what should be.
We need to know four things:
what there is,
what to do about what there is,
 that there is a difference between knowing what there is, and knowing what to do about what there is
and what that difference is.
To explore something, to "discover what it is" - that means most importantly to discover its significance
for motor output, within a particular social context, and only more particularly, to determine its precise
objective sensory or material nature. This is knowledge, in the most basic of senses - and often constitutes
sufficient knowledge.
Imagine that a baby girl, toddling around in the course of her initial tentative investigations, reaches up
onto a counter-top to touch a fragile and expensive glass sculpture. She observes its color, sees its shine,
feels that it is smooth and cold and heavy to the touch. Suddenly her mother interferes, grasps her hand,
tells her not to ever touch that object. The child has just learned a number of specifically consequential
things about the sculpture - has identified its sensory properties, certainly. More importantly, however, she
has determined that approached in the wrong manner, the sculpture is dangerous (at least in the presence of
mother); has discovered as well that the sculpture is regarded more highly, in its present unaltered
configuration, than the exploratory tendency - at least (once again) by mother. The baby girl has
simultaneously encountered an object, from the empirical perspective, and its socioculturally-determined
status. The empirical object might be regarded as those sensory properties "intrinsic" to the object. The
status of the object, by contrast, consists of its meaning - consists of its implication for behavior.
Everything a child encounters has this dual nature, experienced by the child as part of a unified totality.
Everything is something, and means something - and the distinction between essence and significance is
not necessarily drawn.
The significance of something - specified in actuality as a consequence of exploratory activity
undertaken in its vicinity - tends "naturally" to become assimilated to the object itself. The object, after all,
is the proximal cause or the stimulus that "gives rise" to action conducted in its presence. For people
operating naturally, like the child, what something signifies is more or less inextricably part of the thing,
15 







part of its magic. The magic is of course due to apprehension of the specific cultural and intrapsychic
significance of the thing, and not to its objectively determinable sensory qualities. Everyone understands
the child who says, for example, "I saw a scary man"; the child's description is immediate and concrete,
even though he or she has attributed to the object of perception qualities that are in fact context-dependent
and subjective. It is difficult, after all, to realize the subjective nature of fear, and not to feel threat as part of
the "real" world.
The automatic attribution of "meaning" to "things" - or the failure to distinguish between them initially
- is a characteristic of narrative, of myth, not of scientific thought. Narrative accurately captures the nature
of raw experience. Things are scary, people are irritating, events are promising, food is satisfying - at least
in terms of our basic experience. The modern mind, which regards itself as having transcending the domain
of the magical, is nonetheless still endlessly capable of "irrational" (read motivated) reactions. We fall
under the spell of experience whenever we attribute our frustration, aggression, devotion or lust to the
person or situation that exists as the proximal "cause" of such agitation. We are not yet "objective," even in
our most clear-headed moments (and thank God for that). We become immediately immersed in a motion
picture or a novel, and willingly suspend disbelief. We become impressed or terrified, despite ourselves, in
the presence of a sufficiently powerful cultural figurehead (an intellectual idol, a sports superstar, a movie
actor, a political leader, the pope, a famous beauty, even our superior at work) - in the presence, that is, of
anyone who sufficiently embodies the oft-implicit values and ideals that protect us from disorder and lead
us on. Like the medieval individual, we do not even need the person to generate such affect. The icon will
suffice. We pay vast sums of money for articles of clothing worn or personal items used or created by the 9 famous and infamous of our time.
The "natural," pre-experimental, or mythical mind is in fact primarily concerned with meaning - which
is essentially implication for action - and not with "objective" nature. The formal object, as conceptualized
by modern scientifically-oriented consciousness, might appear to those still possessed by the mythic
imagination - if they could "see" it at all - as an irrelevant shell: as all that was left after everything
intrinsically intriguing had been stripped away. For the pre-experimentalist, the thing is mostly truly the
significance of its sensory properties, as they are experienced in subjective experience - in affect, or
emotion. And, in truth - in real life - to know what something is still means to know two things about it:
the first is its motivational relevance; the second is the specific nature of its sensory qualities. The two
forms of knowing are not identical; furthermore, experience and registration of the former necessarily
precedes development of the latter. Something must have emotional impact before it will attract enough
attention to be explored and mapped in accordance with its sensory properties. Those sensory properties -
of prime import to the experimentalist or empiricist - are meaningful only insofar as they serve as cues for
determining specific affective relevance or behavioral significance. We need to know what things are not
to know what they are but to keep track of what they mean - to understand what they signify for our
behavior.
It has taken centuries of firm discipline and intellectual training, religious, proto-scientific, and
scientific, to produce a mind capable of concentrating on phenomena that are not yet or are no longer
immediately intrinsically [instinctively (?)] gripping - to produce a mind that paradoxically regards real as
something separable from relevant. Alternatively, it might be suggested that all the myth has not yet
vanished from science, devoted as it is to human progress, and that it is this nontrivial remainder that
enables the scientist to retain undimmed enthusiasm, while he endlessly studies his fruitflies.
How, precisely, did people think, not so very long ago, before they were experimentalists? What were
things, before they were objective things? These are very difficult questions. The "things" that existed prior
to the development of experimental science do not appear valid either as things, or as the meaning of
things, to the modern mind. The question of the nature of the substance of sol - the sun - (to take a single
example) occupied the minds of those who practiced the pre-experimental "science" of alchemy for many
hundreds of years. We would no longer presume even that the sun has a uniform substance, unique to it,
and would certainly take exception to the properties attributed to this hypothetical element by the medieval
alchemist, if we allowed its existence. Carl Jung, who spent much of the latter part of his life studying
medieval thought patterns, characterized sol:
16 





"... the sun signifies first of all gold, whose [alchemical] sign it shares. But just as the "philosophical"
gold is not the "common" gold, so the sun is neither just the metallic gold nor the heavenly orb.
Sometimes the sun is an active substance hidden in the gold and is extracted [alchemically] as the
tinctura rubea (red tincture). Sometimes, as the heavenly body, it is the possessor of magically effective
and transformative rays. As gold and a heavenly body it contains an active sulphur of a red colour, hot
and dry. Because of this red sulphur the alchemical sun, like the corresponding gold, is red. As every
alchemist knew, gold owes its red color to the admixture of Cu (copper), which he interpreted as Kypris
(the Cyprian, Venus), mentioned in Greek alchemy as the transformative substance. Redness, heat, and
dryness are the classical qualities of the Egyptian Set (Greek Typhon), the evil principle which, like the
alchemical sulphur, is closely connected with the devil. And just as Typhon has his kingdom in the
forbidden sea, so the sun, as sol centralis, has its sea, its "crude perceptible water," and as sol coelestis
its "subtle imperceptible water." This sea water (aqua pontica) is extracted from sun and moon....
The active sun-substance also has favourable effects. As the so-called "balsam" it drips from the sun
and produces lemons, oranges, wine, and, in the mineral kingdom, gold...."0
We can barely understand such a description, contaminated as it is in its entirety by imaginative and
mythological associations, peculiar to the medieval mind. It is precisely this fantastical contamination,
however, that renders the alchemical description worth examining - not from the perspective of the history
of science, concerned with the examination of outdated objective ideas, but from the perspective of
psychology, focused on the interpretation of subjective frames of reference.
"In it [the "Indian Ocean," in this example] are images of heaven and earth, of summer, autumn, winter,
and spring, male and female. If thou callest this spiritual, what thou doest is probable; if corporeal, thou
sayest the truth; if heavenly, thou liest not; if earthly, thou hast well spoken." 11 The alchemist could not
separate his subjective ideas about the nature of things - that is, his hypotheses - from the "things"
themselves. His hypotheses, in turn - products of his imagination - were derived from the unquestioned
and unrecognized "explanatory" presuppositions that made up his culture. The medieval man lived, for
example, in a universe that was moral - where everything, even ores and metals, strived above all for
perfection. 12 Things, for the alchemical mind, were therefore characterized in large part by their moral
nature - by their impact on what we would describe as affect, emotion, or motivation; were therefore
characterized by their relevance or value (which is impact on affect). Description of this relevance took
narrative form, mythic form - as in the example drawn from Jung, where the sulphuric aspect of the sun's
substance is attributed negative, demonic characteristics. It was the great feat of science to strip affect from
perception, so to speak, and to allow for the description of experiences purely in terms of their consensually
apprehensible features. However, it is the case that the affects generated by experiences are real, as well.
The alchemists, whose conceptualizations intermingled affect with sense, dealt with affect as a matter of
course (although they did not "know" it - not explicitly). We have removed the affect from the thing, and
can therefore brilliantly manipulate the thing. We are still victims, however, of the uncomprehended
emotions generated by - we would say, in the presence of - the thing. We have lost the mythic universe of
the pre-experimental mind, or have at least ceased to further its development. That loss has left our
increased technological power ever more dangerously at the mercy of our still unconscious systems of
valuation.
Prior to the time of Descartes, Bacon and Newton, man lived in an animated, spiritual world, saturated
with meaning, imbued with moral purpose. The nature of this purpose was revealed in the stories people
told each other - stories about the structure of the cosmos, and the place of man. But now we think
empirically (at least we think we think empirically), and the spirits that once inhabited the universe have
vanished. The forces released by the advent of the experiment have wreaked havoc within the mythic
world. Jung states:
"How totally different did the world appear to medieval man! For him the earth was eternally fixed and
at rest in the center of the universe, encircled by the course of a sun that solicitously bestowed its
warmth. Men were all children of God under the loving care of the Most High, who prepared them for
eternal blessedness; and all knew exactly what they should do and how they should conduct themselves
17 









in order to rise from a corruptible world to an incorruptible and joyous existence. Such a life no longer
seems real to us, even in our dreams. Natural science has long ago torn this lovely veil to shreds." 13
Even if the medieval individual was not in all cases tenderly and completely enraptured by his religious
beliefs (he was a great believer in Hell, for example), he was certainly not plagued by the plethora of
rational doubts and moral uncertainties that beset his modern counterpart. Religion for the pre-experimental
mind was not so much a matter of faith as a matter of fact - which means that the prevailing religious
viewpoint was not merely one compelling theory among many.
The capacity to maintain explicit belief in religious "fact," however, has been severely undermined in
the last few centuries - first in the West, and then everywhere else. A succession of great scientists and
iconoclasts has demonstrated that the universe does not revolve around man, that our notion of separate
status from and "superiority" to the animal has no empirical basis, and that there is no God in heaven (nor
even a heaven, as far as the eye can see). In consequence, we no longer believe our own stories - no longer
even believe that those stories served us well in the past. The objects of revolutionary scientific discovery -
Galileo's mountains on the lunar orb; Kepler's elliptical planetary orbits - manifested themselves in
apparent violation of mythic order, predicated as it was on the presumption of heavenly perfection. The
new phenomena produced by the procedures of experimentalists could not be, could not exist, from the
perspective defined by tradition. Furthermore - and more importantly - the new theories that arose to make
sense of empirical reality posed a severe threat to the integrity of traditional models of reality, which had
provided the world with determinate meaning. The mythological cosmos had man at its midpoint; the
objective universe was heliocentric, at first, and less than that later. Modern man no longer occupies center
stage. The world is, in consequence, a completely different place.
The mythological perspective has been overthrown by the empirical; or so it appears. This should mean
that the morality predicated upon such myth should have disappeared, as well, as belief in comfortable
illusion vanished. Friedrich Nietzsche made this point clearly, more than a hundred years ago:
"When one gives up Christian belief [for example] one thereby deprives oneself of the right to Christian
morality.... Christianity is a system, a consistently thought out and complete view of things. If one
breaks out of it a fundamental idea, the belief in God, one thereby breaks the whole thing to pieces: one
has nothing of any consequence left in one's hands. Christianity presupposes that man does not know,
cannot know what is good for him and what evil: he believes in God, who alone knows. Christian
morality is a command: its origin is transcendental; it is beyond all criticism, all right to criticize; it
possesses truth only if God is truth - it stands or falls with the belief in God. - If [modern Westerners]
really do believe they know, of their own accord, 'intuitively', what is good and evil; if they
consequently think they no longer have need of Christianity as a guarantee of morality; that is merely
the consequence of the ascendancy of Christian evaluation and an expression of the strength and depth
of this ascendancy: so that the origin of [modern] morality has been forgotten, so that the highly
conditional nature of its right to exist is no longer felt." 14
If the presuppositions of a theory have been invalidated, argues Nietzsche, then the theory has been
invalidated. But the "theory" survives. The fundamental tenets of the Judeo-Christian moral tradition
continue to govern every aspect of the actual individual behavior and basic values of the typical Westerner
- even if he is atheistic and well-educated; even if his abstract notions and utterances appear iconoclastic.
He neither kills, nor steals (or, if he does, he hides his actions, even from his own awareness), and he tends,
in theory, to treat his neighbour as himself. The principles that govern his society (and, increasingly, all
others15) remain predicated on mythic notions of individual value - intrinsic right and responsibility -
despite scientific evidence of causality and determinism in human motivation. Finally, in his mind - even
when sporadically criminal - the victim of a crime still cries out to heaven for "justice," and the conscious
lawbreaker still deserves punishment for his or her actions.
Our systems of post-experimental thought and our systems of motivation and action therefore co-exist in
paradoxical union. One is "up-to-date" - the other, archaic. One is scientific - the other, traditional, even
superstitious. We have become atheistic in our description, but remain evidently religious - that is, moral -
in our disposition. What we accept as true, and how we act, are no longer commensurate. We carry on, as if
18 









our experience has meaning - as if our activities have transcendent value - but we are unable to justify this
belief intellectually. We have become trapped by our own capacity for abstraction: it provides us with
accurate descriptive information, but serves to undermine our belief in the utility and meaning of existence.
This problem has frequently been regarded as tragic (it seems to me, at least, ridiculous) - and has been
thoroughly explored, in existential philosophy and literature. Nietzsche described this modern condition as
the (inevitable and necessary) consequence of the "death of God:"
"Have you not heard of that madman who lit a lantern in the bright morning hours, ran to the market
place, and cried incessantly, 'I seek God! I seek God!' As many of those who do not believe in God
were standing around just then, he provoked much laughter.
Why, did he get lost? said one. Did he lose his way like a child? said another. Or is he hiding? Is he
afraid of us? Has he gone on a voyage? or emigrated? Thus they yelled and laughed.
The madman jumped into their midst and pierced them with his glances. 'Whither is God' he cried. 'I
shall tell you. We have killed him - you and I. All of us are his murderers. But how have we done this?
How were we able to drink up the sea? Who gave us the sponge to wipe away the entire horizon? What
did we do when we unchained this earth from its sun? Whither is it moving now? Whither are we
moving now? Away from all suns? Are we not plunging continuously? Backward, sideward, forward, in
all directions? Is there any up or down left? Are we not straying as through an infinite nothing? Do we
not feel the breath of empty space? Has it not become colder? Is not night and more night coming on all
the while? Must not lanterns be lit in the morning? Do we not hear anything yet of the noise of the
grave-diggers who are burying God? Do we not smell anything yet of God's decomposition? Gods too
decompose.
God is dead. God remains dead. And we have killed him. How shall we, the murderers of all
murderers, comfort ourselves? What was holiest and most powerful of all that the world has yet owned
has bled to death under our knives. Who will wipe this blood off us? What water is there for us to clean
ourselves? What festivals of atonement, what sacred games shall we have to invent? Is not the greatness
of this deed too great for us? Must not we ourselves become gods simply to seem worthy of it? 16 "
We find ourselves in an absurd and unfortunate situation - when our thoughts turn, involuntarily, to
consideration of our situation. It seems impossible to believe that life is intrinsically, religiously
meaningful. We continue to act and think "as if," however- as if nothing fundamental has really changed.
That does not change the fact that our integrity has vanished.
The great forces of empiricism and rationality and the great technique of the experiment have killed
myth, and it cannot be resurrected - or so it seems. We still act out the precepts of our forebears, however,
although we can no longer justify our actions. Our behavior is shaped (at least in the ideal) by the same
mythic rules - thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not covet - that guided our ancestors, for the thousands of
years they lived, without benefit of formal empirical thought. This means that those rules are so powerful -
so necessary, at least - that they maintain their existence (and flourish, and expand their domain) even in
the presence of explicit theories that undermine their validity. That is a mystery - and here is another:
How is it that complex and admirable ancient civilizations could have developed and flourished,
initially, if they were predicated upon nonsense? (If a culture survives, and grows, does that not indicate in
some profound way that the ideas it is based upon are valid? If myths are mere superstitious proto-theories,
why did they work? Why were they remembered? Our great rationalist ideologies, after all - fascist, say, or
communist - demonstrated their essential uselessness within the space of mere generations, despite their
intellectually compelling nature. Traditional societies, predicated on religious notions, have survived -
essentially unchanged, in some cases, for tens of thousands of years. How can this longevity be
understood?) Is it actually sensible to argue that persistently successful traditions are based on ideas that are
simply wrong, regardless of their utility?
Is it not more likely that we just do not know how it could be that traditional notions are right, given
their appearance of extreme irrationality?
Is it not likely that this indicates modern philosophical ignorance, rather than ancestral philosophical
error?
19 








We have made the great mistake of assuming that the "world of spirit" described by those who preceded
us was the modern "world of matter," primitively conceptualized. This is not true - at least not in the
simple manner we generally believe. The cosmos described by mythology was not the same place known to
the practitioners of modern science - but that does not mean it was not real. We have not yet found God
above, nor the Devil below, because we do not yet understand where "above" and "below" might be found.
We do not know what our ancestors were talking about. This is not surprising, because they did not
"know," either (and it didn't really matter that they did not know). Consider this archaic creation myth 17
from Sumer - the "birthplace of history":
"So far, no cosmogonic text properly speaking has been discovered, but some allusions permit us to
reconstruct the decisive moments of creation, as the Sumerians conceived it. The goddess Nammu
(whose name is written with the pictograph representing the primordial sea) is presented as "the mother
who gave birth to the Sky and the Earth" and the "ancestress who brought forth all the gods." The theme
of the primordial waters, imagined as a totality at once cosmic and divine, is quite frequent in archaic
cosmogonies. In this case too, the watery mass is identified with the original Mother, who, by
parthenogenesis, gave birth to the first couple, the Sky (An) and the Earth (Ki), incarnating the male and
female principles. This first couple was united, to the point of merging, in the hieros gamos [mystical
marriage]. From their union was born En-lil, the god of the atmosphere. Another fragment informs us
that the latter separated his parents.... The cosmogonic theme of the separation of sky and earth is also
widely disseminated." 18
This myth is typical of archaic "descriptions of reality." What does it mean to say that the Sumerians
believed that the world emerged from a "primordial sea," which was the mother of all, and that the sky and
the earth were separated by the act of a deity? We do not know. Our abysmal ignorance in this regard has
not been matched, however, by a suitable caution. We appear to have made the presumption that stories
such as these - myths - were equivalent in function and intent (but were inferior methodologically) to
empirical or post-experimental description. It is this fundamentally absurd insistence that, above all, has
destabilized the effect of religious tradition upon the organization of modern human moral reasoning and
behavior. The "world" of the Sumerians was not objective reality, as we presently construe it. It was
simultaneously more and less - more, in that this "primitive" world contained phenomena that we do not
consider part of "reality," such as affect and meaning; less, in that the Sumerians could not describe (or
conceive of) many of those things the processes of science have revealed to us.
Myth is not primitive proto-science. It is a qualitatively different phenomenon. Science might be
considered "description of the world with regards to those aspects that are consensually apprehensible" or
"specification of the most effective mode of reaching an end (given a defined end)." Myth can be more
accurately regarded as "description of the world as it signifies (for action)." The mythic universe is a place
to act, not a place to perceive. Myth describes things in terms of their unique or shared affective valence,
their value, their motivational significance. The Sky (An) and the Earth (Ki) of the Sumerians are not the
sky and earth of modern man, therefore; they are the Great Father and Mother of all things [including the
thing - En-lil, who is actually a process - that in some sense gave rise to them].
We do not understand pre-experimental thinking, so we try to explain it in terms that we do understand -
which means that we explain it away, define it as nonsense. After all, we think scientifically - so we
believe - and we think we know what that means (since scientific thinking can in principle be defined). We
are familiar with scientific thinking, and value it highly - so we tend to presume that that is all there is to
thinking (that all other "forms of thought" are approximations, at best, to the ideal of scientific thought).
But this is not accurate. Thinking also and more fundamentally is specification of value - is specification of
implication for behavior. This means that categorization, with regards to value -determination (or even
perception) of what constitutes a single thing, or class of things - is the act of grouping together according
to implication for behavior.
The Sumerian category of Sky (An), for example, is a domain of phenomena with similar implications
for behavioral output, or for affect; the same can be said for the category of Earth (Ki), and all other mythic
categories. The fact that the "domain of the Sky" has implications for action - has motivational
significance - makes it a deity (which is something that controls behavior, or at least that must be served).
20 




Comprehension of the fact that such a classification system actually has meaning necessitates learning to
think differently (necessitates, as well, learning to think about thinking differently).
The Sumerians were concerned, above all, with how to act (with the value of things). Their descriptions
of reality (to which we attribute the qualities of proto-science) in fact comprised their summary of the
world as phenomena with meaning - as place to act. They did not "know" this - not explicitly - any more
than we do. But it was still true.
The empirical endeavor is concerned with objective description of what is - with determination of what
it is about a given phenomena that can be consensually validated and described. The objects of this process
may be those of the past, the present, or the future, and may be static or dynamic in nature: a good scientific
theory allows for prediction and control of becoming (of "transformation") as well as being. However, the
"affect" that an encounter with an "object" generates is not a part of what that object is, from this
perspective, and therefore must be eliminated from further consideration (along with anything else
subjective) - must be at least eliminated from definition as a real aspect of the object.
The painstaking empirical process of identification, communication and comparison has proved to be a
strikingly effective means for accurately specifying the nature of the relatively invariant features of the
collectively apprehensible world. Unfortunately, this useful methodology cannot be applied to
determination of value - to consideration of what should be, to specification of the direction that things
should take (which means, to description of the future we should construct, as a consequence of our
actions). Such acts of valuation necessarily constitute moral decisions. We can use information generated in
consequence of the application of science to guide those decisions, but not to tell us if they are correct. We
lack a process of verification, in the moral domain, that is as powerful or as universally acceptable as the
experimental (empirical) method, in the realm of description. This absence does not allow us to sidestep the
problem. No functioning society or individual can avoid rendering moral judgment, regardless of what
might be said or imagined about the necessity of such judgment. Action presupposes valuation, or its
implicit or "unconscious" equivalent. To act is literally to manifest preference about one set of possibilities,
contrasted to an infinite set of alternatives. If we will live, we must act. Acting, we value. Lacking
omniscience, painfully, we must make decisions, in the absence of sufficient information. It is, traditionally
speaking, our knowledge of good and evil, our moral sensibility, that allows us this ability. It is our
mythological conventions, operating implicitly or explicitly, that guide our choices. But what are these
conventions? How are we to understand the fact of their existence? How are we to understand them?
It was Nietzsche, once again, who put his finger on the modern problem, central to issues of valence or
meaning: not, as before "how to act, from within the confines of a particular culture," but "whether to
believe that the question of how to act could even be reasonably asked, let alone answered":
"Just because our moral philosophers knew the facts of morality only very approximately in arbitrary
extracts or in accidental epitomes - for example, as the morality of their environment, their class, their
church, the spirit of their time, their climate and part of the world- just because they were poorly
informed and not even very curious about different peoples, times, and past ages - they never laid eyes
on the real problems of morality; for these emerge only when we compare many moralities. In all
'science of morals' so far one thing was lacking, strange as it may sound: the problem of morality itself;
what was lacking was any suspicion that there was something problematic here."9
This "problem of morality" - is there anything moral, in any realistic general sense, and if so, how might it
be comprehended? - is a question that has now attained paramount importance. We have the technological
power to do anything we want (certainly, anything destructive; potentially, anything creative); commingled
with that power, however, is an equally profound existential uncertainty, shallowness and confusion. Our
constant cross-cultural interchanges and our capacity for critical reasoning has undermined our faith in the
traditions of our forebears - perhaps for good reason. However, the individual cannot live without belief -
without action and valuation - and science cannot provide that belief. We must nonetheless put our faith
into something. Are the myths we have turned to since the rise of science more sophisticated, less
dangerous, and more complete than those we rejected? The ideological structures that dominated social
relations in the twentieth century appear no less absurd, on the face of it, than the older belief systems they
supplanted; they lacked, in addition, any of the incomprehensible mystery that necessarily remains part of
21 






genuinely artistic and creative production. The fundamental propositions of fascism and communism were
rational, logical, statable, comprehensible - and terribly wrong. No great ideological struggle presently
tears at the soul of the world, but it is difficult to believe that we have outgrown our gullibility. The rise of
the New Age movement in the West, for example - as compensation for the decline of traditional
spirituality - provides sufficient evidence for our continued ability to swallow a camel, while straining at a
gnat.
Could we do better? Is it possible to understand what might reasonably, even admirably, be believed,
after understanding that we must believe? Our vast power makes self-control (and, perhaps, selfcomprehension)
a necessity - so we have the motivation, at least in principle. Furthermore, the time is
auspicious. The third Christian millenium is dawning - at the end of an era when we have demonstrated, to
the apparent satisfaction of everyone, that certain forms of social regulation just do not work - even when
judged by their own criteria for success. We live in the aftermath of the great statist experiments of the
twentieth century, after all, conducted as Nietzsche prophecied:
"In the doctrine of socialism there is hidden, rather badly, a 'will to negate life'; the human beings or
races that think up such a doctrine must be bungled. Indeed, I should wish that a few great experiments
might prove that in a socialist society life negates itself, cuts off its own roots. The earth is large enough
and man still sufficiently unexhausted; hence such a practical instruction and demonstratio ad absurdum
would not strike me as undesirable, even if it were gained and paid for with a tremendous expenditure of
human lives."0
There appears to exist some "natural" or even - dare it be said - some "absolute" constraints on the manner
in which human beings may act as individuals and in society. Some moral presuppositions and theories are
wrong; human nature is not infinitely malleable.
It has become more or less evident that pure, abstract rationality, for example, ungrounded in tradition -
the rationality which defined Soviet-style communism from inception to dissolution - appears absolutely
unable to determine and make explicit just what it is that should guide individual and social behavior. Some
systems do not work, even though they make abstract sense (even more sense than alternative, currently
operative, incomprehensible, haphazardly evolved systems). Some patterns of interpersonal interaction -
which constitute the state, insofar as it exists as a model for social behavior - do not produce the ends they
are supposed to produce, can not sustain themselves over time, or even produce contrary ends, devouring
those who enact them and profess their value. Perhaps this is because planned, logical and intelligible
systems fail to make allowance for the irrational, transcendent, incomprehensible and often ridiculous
aspect of human character, as described by Dostoevsky:
"Now I ask you: what can be expected of man since he is a being endowed with such strange qualities?
Shower upon him every earthly blessing, drown him in a sea of happiness, so that nothing but bubbles of
bliss can be seen on the surface; give him economic prosperity, such that he should have nothing else to
do but sleep, eat cakes and busy himself with the continuation of his species, and even then out of sheer
ingratitude, sheer spite, man would play you some nasty trick. He would even risk his cakes and would
deliberately desire the most fatal rubbish, the most uneconomical absurdity, simply to introduce into all
this positive good sense his fatal fantastic element. It is just his fantastic dreams, his vulgar folly that he
will desire to retain, simply in order to prove to himself - as though that were so necessary - that men
still are men and not the keys of a piano, which the laws of nature threaten to control so completely that
soon one will be able to desire nothing but by the calendar.
And that is not all: even if man really were nothing but a piano-key, even if this were proved to him
by natural science and mathematics, even then he would not become reasonable, but would purposely do
something perverse out of simple ingratitude, simply to gain his point. And if he does not find means he
will contrive destruction and chaos, will contrive sufferings of all sorts, only to gain his point! He will
launch a curse upon the world, and as only man can curse (it is his privilege, the primary distinction
between him and other animals), may be by his curse alone he will attain his object - that is, convince
himself that he is a man and not a piano-key! If you say that all this, too, can be calculated and
tabulated, chaos and darkness and curses, so that the mere possibility of calculating it all beforehand
22 



would stop it all, and reason would reassert itself, then man would purposely go mad in order to be rid
of reason and gain his point! I believe in it, I answer for it, for the whole work of man really seems to
consist in nothing but proving to himself every minute that he is a man and not a piano-key! It may be at
the cost of his skin, it may be by cannibalism! And this being so, can one help being tempted to rejoice
that it has not yet come off, and that desire still depends on something we don't know?"1
We also presently possess in accessible and complete form the traditional wisdom of a large part of the
human race - possess accurate description of the myths and rituals that contain and condition the implicit
and explicit values of almost everyone who has ever lived. These myths are centrally and properly
concerned with the nature of successful human existence. Careful comparative analysis of this great body
of religious philosophy might allow us to provisionally determine the nature of essential human motivation
and morality - if we were willing to admit our ignorance, and take the risk. Accurate specification of
underlying mythological commonalities might comprise the first developmental stage in the conscious
evolution of a truly universal system of morality. The establishment of such a system, acceptable to
empirical and religious minds alike, could prove of incalculable aid in the reduction of intrapsychic, interindividual
and intergroup conflict. The grounding of such a comparative analysis within a psychology (or
even a neuropsychology) informed by strict empirical research might offer us the possibility of a form of
convergent validation, and help us overcome the age-old problem of deriving the ought from the is; help us
see how what we must do might be inextricably associated with what it is that we are.
Proper analysis of mythology, of the type proposed here, is not mere discussion of "historical" events
enacted upon the world stage (as the traditionally religious might have it), and it is not mere investigation
of primitive belief (as the traditionally scientific might presume). It is, instead, the examination, analysis
and subsequent incorporation of an edifice of meaning, which contains within it hierarchical organization
of experiential valence. The mythic imagination is concerned with the world in the manner of the
phenomenologist, who seeks to discover the nature of subjective reality, instead of concerning himself with
description of the objective world. Myth, and the drama that is part of myth, provide answers in image to
the following question: "how can the current state of experience be conceptualized in abstraction, with
regards to its meaning?" [which means its (subjective, biologically-predicated, socially-constructed)
emotional relevance or motivational significance]. Meaning means implication for behavioral output;
logically, therefore, myth presents information relevant to the most fundamental of moral problems: "what
should be? (what should be done?)" The desirable future (the object of what should be) can only be
conceptualized in relationship to the present, which serves at least as a necessary point of contrast and
comparison. To get somewhere in the future presupposes being somewhere in the present; furthermore, the
desirability of the place travelled to depends on the valence of the place vacated. The question of "what
should be?" (what line should be travelled?) therefore has contained within it, so to speak, three
subqueries, which might be formulated as follows:
1) what is? - what is the nature (meaning, the significance) of the current state of experience?
2) what should be? - to what (desirable, valuable) end should that state be moving?
3) how should we therefore act? - what is the nature of the specific processes by which the present state
might be transformed into that which is desired?
Active apprehension of the goal of behavior, conceptualized in relationship to the interpreted present,
serves to constrain or provide determinate framework for the evaluation of ongoing events, which emerge
as a consequence of current behavior. The goal is an imaginary state, consisting of "a place" of desirable
motivation or affect - is a state that only exists in fantasy, as something (potentially) preferable to the
present. (Construction of the goal therefore means establishment of a theory about the ideal relative status
of motivational states - about the good.) This imagined future constitutes a vision of perfection, so to
speak, generated in the light of all current knowledge (at least under optimal conditions), to which specific
and general aspects of ongoing experience are continually compared. This vision of perfection is the
promised land, mythologically speaking - conceptualized as a spiritual domain (a psychological state), a
political utopia (a state, literally speaking), or both, simultaneously.
We answer the question "what should be?" by formulating an image of the desired future.
23 



We cannot conceive of that future, except in relationship to the (interpreted) present - and it is our
interpretation of the emotional acceptability of the present that comprises our answer to the question "what
is?" ["what is the nature (meaning, the significance) of the current state of experience?"].
We answer the question "how then should we act?" by determining the most efficient and self-consistent
strategy, all things considered, for bringing the preferred future into being.

What
IS
What
SHOULD BE
Our answers to these three fundamental questions - modified and constructed in the course of our social
interactions - constitutes our knowledge, insofar as it has any behavioral relevance; constitutes our
knowledge, from the mythological perspective. The structure of the mythic known - what is, what should
be, and how to get from one to the other - is presented in Figure 1: The Domain and Constituent
Elements of the Known.
The known is explored territory, a place of stability and familiarity - is the "city of God," as profanely
realized. It finds metaphorical embodiment in myths and narratives describing the community, the
kingdom, or the state. Such myths and narratives guide our ability to understand the particular, bounded
motivational significance of the present, experienced in relation to some identifiable desired future, and
allow us to construct and interpret appropriate patterns of action, from within the confines of that schema.
We all produce determinate models of what is, and what should be, and how to transform one into the
other. We produce these models by balancing our own desires, as they find expression in fantasy and
action, with with those of the others - individual, families and communities - that we habitually encounter.
"How to act," constitutes the most essential aspect of the social contract; the domain of the known is,
therefore, the "territory" we inhabit with all those who share our implicit and explicit traditions and beliefs.
24 





Myths describe the existence of this "shared and determinate territory" as a fixed aspect of existence -
which it is, as the fact of culture is an unchanging aspect of the human environment.
"Narratives of the known" - patriotic rituals, stories of ancestral heroes, myths and symbols of cultural
or racial identity - describe established territory, weaving for us a web of meaning that, shared with others,
eliminates the necessity of dispute over meaning. All those who know the rules, and accept them, can play
the game - without fighting over the rules of the game. This makes for peace, stability, and potential
prosperity - a good game. The good, however, is the enemy of the better; a more compelling game might
always exist. Myth portrays what is known, and performs a function that if limited to that, might be
regarded as paramount in importance. But myth also presents information that is far more profound -
almost unutterably so, once (I would argue) properly understood. We all produce models of what is, and
what should be, and how to transform one into the other. We change our behavior, when the consequences
of that behavior are not what we would like. But sometimes mere alteration in behavior is insufficient. We
must change not only what we do, but what we think is important. This means reconsideration of the nature
of the motivational significance of the present, and reconsideration of the ideal nature of the future. This is
a radical, even revolutionary transformation, and it is a very complex process in its realization - but mythic
thinking has represented the nature of such change in great and remarkable detail.
The basic grammatical structure of transformational mythology, so to speak, appears most clearly
revealed in the form of the "way" (as in the "American Way of Life"). The great literary critic Northrop
Frye comments upon the idea of the way, as it manifests itself in literature and religious writing:
"Following a narrative is closely connected with the central literary metaphor of the journey, where we
have a person making the journey and the road, path, or direction taken, the simplest word for this being
'way.' Journey is a word connected with jour and journee, and metaphorical journeys, deriving as they
mostly do from slower methods of getting around, usually have at their core the conception of the day's
journey, the amount of space we can cover under the cycle of the sun. By a very easy extension of
metaphor we get the day's cycle as a symbol for the whole of life. Thus in Housman's poem 'Reveille'
("Up, lad: when the journey's over/ There'll be time enough to sleep") the awakening in the morning is
a metaphor of continuing the journey of life, a journey ending in death. The prototype for the image is
the Book of Ecclesiastes, which urges us to work while it is day, before the night comes when no man
can work...."
The word 'way' is a good example of the extent to which language is built up on a series of
metaphorical analogies. The most common meaning of 'way' in English is a method or manner of
procedure, but method and manner imply some sequential repetition, and the repetition brings us to the
metaphorical kernel of a road or path.... In the Bible 'way' normally translates the Hebrew derek and the
Greek hodos, and throughout the Bible there is a strong emphasis on the contrast between a straight way
that takes us to our destination and a divergent way that misleads or confuses. This metaphorical
contrast haunts the whole of Christian literature: we start reading Dante's Commedia, and the third line
speaks of a lost or erased way: "Che la diritta via era smarita." Other religions have the same metaphor:
Buddhism speaks of what is usually called in English an eightfold path. In Chinese Taoism the Tao is
usually also rendered 'way' by Arthur Waley and others, though I understand that the character
representing the word is formed of radicals meaning something like 'head-going.' The sacred book of
Taoism, the Tao te Ching, begins by saying that the Tao that can be talked about is not the real Tao: in
other words we are being warned to beware of the traps in metaphorical language, or, in a common
Oriental phrase, of confusing the moon with the finger pointing at it. But as we read on we find that the
Tao can, after all, be to some extent characterized: the way is specifically the 'way of the valley,' the
direction taken by humility, self-effacement, and the kind of relaxation, or non-action, that makes all
action effective."2
The "way" is the path of life, and its purpose.23 More accurately, the content of the way is the specific path
of life. The form of the way, its most fundamental aspect, is the apparently intrinsic or heritable possibility
of positing or of being guided by a central idea. This apparently intrinsic form finds its expression in the
tendency of each individual, generation after generation, to first ask and subsequently seek an answer to the
question "what is the meaning of life?"
25 



The central notion of the way underlies manifestation of four more specific myths, or classes of myths,
and provides a more complete answer, in dramatic form, to the three questions posed previously [what is
the nature (meaning, the significance) of current being?, to what (desirable) end should that state be
moving? and, finally, what are the processes by which the present state might be transformed into that
which is desired?] The four classes include:
(1) Myths describing a current or pre-existent stable state (sometimes a paradise, sometimes a tyranny);
(2) Myths describing the emergence of something anomalous, unexpected, threatening and promising
into this initial state;
(3) Myths describing the dissolution of the pre-existent stable state into chaos, as a consequence of the
anomalous or unexpected occurrence;
(4) Myths describing the regeneration of stability [paradise regained (or, tyranny regenerated)], from the
chaotic mixture of dissolute previous experience and anomalous information.

The meta-mythology of the way, so to speak, describes the manner in which specific ideas (myths)
about the present, the future, and the mode of transforming one into the other are initially constructed, and
then reconstructed, in their entirety, when that becomes necessary. The traditional Christian (and not just
Christian) notion that man has fallen from an original "state of grace" into his current morally degenerate
and emotionally unbearable condition - accompanied by a desire for the "return to Paradise" - constitutes a
single example of this "meta-myth." Christian morality can therefore be reasonably regarded as the "plan of
action" whose aim is re-establishment, or establishment, or attainment (sometimes in the "hereafter") of the
26 



"kingdom of God," the ideal future. The idea that man needs redemption - and that re-establishment of a
long-lost Paradise might constitute such redemption - appear as common themes of mythology, among
members of exceedingly diverse and long-separated human cultures.24 This commonality appears because
man, eternally self-conscious, suffers eternally from his existence, and constantly longs for respite.
Figure 2: The Metamythological Cycle of the Way schematically portrays the "circle" of the way,
which "begins" and "ends" at the same point - with establishment of conditional, but determinate moral
knowledge (belief). Belief is disruptible, because finite - which is to say that the infinite mystery
surrounding human understanding may break through into our provisional models of how to act, at any
time, at any point, and disrupt their structure. The manner in which we act as children, for example, may be
perfectly appropriate, for the conditions of childhood; the processes of maturation change the conditions of
existence, introducing anomaly where only certainty once stood, making necessary not only a change of
plans, but reconceptualization of where those plans might lead, and what or who they refer to, in the
present.
The known, our current story, protects us from the unknown, from chaos - which is to say, provides our
experience with determinate and predictable structure. The unknown, chaos - from which we are protected
- has a nature all of its own. That nature is experienced as affective valence, at first exposure, not as
objective property. If something unknown or unpredictable occurs, while we are carrying out our motivated
plans, we are first surprised. That surprise - which is a combination of apprehension and curiosity -
comprises our instinctive emotional response to the occurrence of something we did not desire. The
appearance of something unexpected is proof that we do not know how to act - by definition, as it is the
production of what we want that we use as evidence for the integrity of our knowledge. If we are
somewhere we don't know how to act, we are (probably) in trouble - we might learn something new, but
we are still in trouble. When we are in trouble, we get scared. When we are in the domain of the known, so
to speak, there is no reason for fear. Outside that domain, panic reigns. It is for this reason that we dislike
having our plans disrupted. So we cling to what we understand. This does not always work, however,
because what we understand about the present is not always necessarily sufficient to deal with the future.
This means that we have to be able to modify what we understand, even though to do so is to risk our own
undoing. The trick, of course, is to modify and yet to remain secure. This is not so simple. Too much
modification - chaos. Too little modification - stagnation (and then, when the future we are unprepared for
appears - chaos).
Involuntary exposure to chaos means accidental encounter with the "forces that undermine the known
world." The affective consequences of such encounter can be literally overwhelming. It is for this reason
that individuals are highly motivated to avoid sudden "manifestations of the unknown" - for this reason
that individuals will go to almost any length to ensure that their protective cultural "stories" remain intact.
27 





CHAPTER 2: MAPS OF MEANING: THREE LEVELS OF ANALSIS

Human beings are prepared, biologically, to respond to anomalous information - to novelty. This
instinctive response includes redirection of attention, generation of emotion (fear, first - generally
speaking - then curiosity), and behavioral compulsion (cessation of ongoing activity, first - generally
speaking - then active approach and exploration). This pattern of instinctive response drives learning -
particularly, but not exclusively, the learning of appropriate behavior. All such learning takes place - or
took place originally - as a consequence of contact with novelty, or anomaly.
What is novel is of course dependent on what is known - is necessarily defined in opposition to what is
known. Furthermore, what is known is always known conditionally, since human knowledge is necessarily
limited. Our conditional knowledge - insofar as that knowledge is relevant for the regulation of emotion -
consists of our models of the emotional significance of the present, defined in opposition to an idealized,
hypothetical or fantasied future state. We evaluate the "unbearable present" in relationship to the "ideal
future." We act, to transform "where we are" into "where we would like to be."
When our attempts to transform the present work as planned, we remain firmly positioned in the domain
of the known (metaphorically speaking). When our behaviors produce results that we did not want,
however - that is, when we err - we move into the domain of the unknown, where more primordial
emotional forces rule. "Small-scale" errors force us to reconstruct our plans, but allow us to retain our
goals and our conceptualizations of present conditions. Catastrophic errors, by contrast, force us not only
to re-evaluate our means, but our starting-points, and our ends. Such revaluation necessarily involves
extreme emotional dysregulation.
The "domain of the known" and the "domain of the unknown" can reasonably be regarded as
permanent constituent elements of human experience - even of the human environment. Regardless of
culture, place and time, human individuals are forced to adapt to the fact of culture (the domain of the
known, roughly speaking) and the fact of its ultimate insufficiency (as the domain of the unknown
necessarily remains extant, regardless of extent of previous "adaptation"). The human brain - and the
higher animal brain - appears therefore to have adapted itself to the eternal presence of these two
"places"; the brain has one mode of operation, when in explored territory, and another, when in
unexplored territory. In the unexplored world, caution - expressed in fear and behavioral immobility -
initially predominates, but may be superseded by curiosity - expressed in hope, excitement and, above all,
in creative exploratory behavior. Creative exploration of the unknown, and consequent generation of
knowledge, is construction or update of patterns of behavior and representation, such that the unknown is
transformed from something terrifying and compelling into something beneficial (or, at least, something
irrelevant). The presence of capacity for such creative exploration and knowledge generation may be
regarded as the third, and final, permanent constituent element of human experience (in addition to the
domain of the "known" and "unknown").
Mythological representations of the world - which are representations of reality as a forum for action -
portray the dynamic interrelationship between all three constituent elements of human experience. The
eternal unknown - nature, metaphorically speaking, creative and destructive, source and destination of all
determinant things - is generally ascribed an affectively ambivalent feminine character (as the "mother"
and eventual "devourer" of everyone and everything). The eternal known, in contrast - culture, defined
territory, tyrannical and protective, predictable, disciplined and restrictive, cumulative consequence of
heroic or exploratory behavior - is typically considered masculine (in contradistinction to "mother"
nature). The eternal knower, finally - the process that mediates between the known and the unknown - is
the knight who slays the dragon of chaos, the hero who replaces disorder and confusion with clarity and
certainty, the sun-god who eternally slays the forces of darkness, and the "word" that engenders creation
of the cosmos.
28 












2.1. Normal and Revolutionary Life: Two Prosaic Stories
We tell ourselves stories about who we are, where we would like to be, and how we are going to get there.
These stories regulate our emotions, by determining the significance of all the things we encounter and all
the events we experience. We regard things that get us on our way as positive, things that impede our
progress as negative, and things that do neither as irrelevant. Most things are irrelevant - and that is a
good thing, as we have limited attentional resources.
Inconveniences interfere with our plans. We do not like inconveniences, and will avoid dealing with
them. Nonetheless, they occur commonly - so commonly, in fact, that they might be regarded as an
integral, "predictable," and constant feature of the human environment. We have adapted to this feature -
have the intrinsic resources to cope with inconveniences. We benefit, become stronger, in doing so.
Ignored inconveniences accumulate, rather than disappear. When they accumulate in sufficient
numbers, they produce a catastrophe - a self-induced catastrophe, to be sure, but one that may be
indistinguishable from an "act of God." Inconveniences interfere with the integrity of our plans - so we
tend to pretend that they are not there. Catastrophes, by contrast, interfere with the integrity of our whole
stories, and massively dysregulate our emotions. By their nature, they are harder to ignore - although that
does not stop us from trying to do so.
Inconveniences are common; unfortunately, so are catastrophes - self-induced and otherwise. We are
adapted to catastrophes, like inconveniences, as constant environmental features. We can resolve a
catastrophe, just as we can cope with an inconvenience - although at higher cost. As a consequence of this
adaptation, this capacity for resolution, catastrophe can rejuvenate. It can also destroy.
The more ignored inconveniences in a given catastrophe, the more likely it will destroy.
Enough has been learned in the last half-century of inquiry into intellectual and emotional function to
enable the development of a provisional general theory of emotional regulation. Description of the role
reaction to novelty or anomaly plays in human information processing is clearly central to such a theory. A
compelling body of evidence suggests that our affective, cognitive and behavioral responses to the
unknown or unpredictable are "hardwired"; suggests that these responses constitute inborn structural
elements of the process of consciousness itself. We attend, involuntarily, to those things that occur contrary
to our predictions - that occur in spite of our desires, as expressed in expectation. That involuntary
attention comprises a large part of what we refer to when we say "consciousness." Our initial attention
constitutes the first step in the process by which we come to adjust our behavior and our interpretive
schemas to the world of experience - assuming that we do so; constitutes as well the first step we take
when we modify the world, to make it what we desire, instead of what it is currently.
Modern investigation into the role of novelty in emotion and thought began with the Russians - E.N.
Sokolov, O. Vinogradova, A.R. Luria (and, more recently, E. Goldberg) - who adopted an approach to
human function that is in many ways unique. Their tradition apparently stems from Pavlov, who viewed the
reflex arc as a phenomenon of central importance, and from the Marxist intellectual legacy, which regarded
work - creative action - as the defining feature of man. Whatever the specific historical precedents, it is
most definitely the case that the Russians have regarded motor output and its abstract equivalents as the
critically relevant aspect of human existence. This intellectual position distinguished them, historically,
from their western counterparts, who tend(ed) to view the brain as an information-processing machine, akin
to the computer. Psychologists in the west have concentrated their energies on determining how the brain
determines what is out there, so to speak - out there, from the objective viewpoint. The Russians, by
contrast, have devoted themselves to the role of the brain in governing behavior, and in generating the
affects or emotions associated with that behavior. Modern animal experimentalists - most notably Jeffrey
Gray25 - have adopted the Russian line, with striking success. We now know, at least in broad outline, how
we respond to those (annoying, irritating, frightening, promising) things that we do not expect.
The pioneering Russian psychophysiologist E.N. Sokolov began work on the "reflex basis" of attention
in the 1950's. By the early 60's, this work had advanced to the point where he could formulate the
following key propositions - first:
29 







"One possible approach to analyzing the process of reflection is to consider the nervous system as a
mechanism which models the external world by specific changes that occur in its internal structure. In
this sense a distinct set of changes in the nervous system is isomorphic with the external agent that it
reflects and resembles. As an internal model that develops in the nervous system in response to the
effect of agents in the environment, the image performs the vital function of modifying the nature of
behavior, allowing the organism to predict events and actively adjust to its environment."6
and second:
"My first encounter with phenomena which indicated that the higher divisions of the central nervous
system form models of external agents involved the study of reactions to "novel" [stimulus features. I
characterized these reactions as] orienting reflexes. The peculiar feature of the orienting reflex is that
after several applications of the same stimulus (generally five to fifteen) the response disappears (or, as
the general expression goes, "is extinguished"). However, the slightest possible change in the stimulus is
sufficient to awaken the response.... Research on the orienting reflex indicates that it does not occur as a
direct result of incoming excitation; rather, it is produced by signals of discrepancy which develop when
afferent [that is, incoming] signals are compared with the trace formed in the nervous system by an
earlier signal."
Sokolov was concerned primarily with the modelling of the events in the objective external world -
assuming, essentially, that when we model, we model facts. Most of the scholars who have followed his
lead have adopted this central assumption, at least implicitly. This position requires some modification. We
do model facts, but we concern ourselves with valence, or value. It is therefore the case that our maps of
the world contain what might be regarded as two distinct types of information - sensory, and affective. It is
not enough to know that something is. It is equally necessary to know what it signifies. It might even be
argued that animals - and human beings - are primarily concerned with the affective or emotional
significance of the environment.
Along with our animal cousins, we devote ourselves to fundamentals: will this (new) thing eat me? Can
I eat it? Will it chase me? Should I chase it? Can I make love to it? We model facts - there is no doubt
about that. But we model facts to keep track of meaning. We may model facts, and it is no doubt useful to
do so. We must model meanings, however, in order to survive. Our most fundamental maps of experience -
maps which have a narrative structure - portray the motivational value of our current state, conceived of in
contrast to a hypothetical ideal, accompanied by plans of action, which are our pragmatic notions about
how to get what we want.
Description of these three elements - current state, future state, and means of mediation - constitute the
necessary and sufficient preconditions for the weaving of the most simple narrative, which is a means for
describing the valence of a given environment, in reference to a temporally and spatially bounded set of
action patterns. Getting to point "b" presupposes that you are at point "a" - you can't plan movement in the
absence of an initial position. The fact that point "b" constitutes the end-goal means that it is valenced more
highly than point "a" - that it is a place more desirable, when considered against the necessary contrast of
the current position. It is the perceived improvement of point "b" that makes the whole map meaningful -
that is, affect-laden; it is the capacity to construct hypothetical or abstract end points, such as "b" - and to
contrast them against "the present" - that makes human beings capable of using their cognitive systems to
modulate their affective reactions. 28
Narratives mediate between belief and emotion. "Normal" narratives tell us where we are, where we are
going, and how we are going to get there. "Revolutionary" narratives, by contrast, describe the process by
which "normal" narratives are transformed, when that becomes necessary. There is no strict qualitative
distinction between the two narrative "types," as we shall see, later; it is more a matter of degree.
Nonetheless, they may be usefully considered as separable entities, for the purposes of introductory
explication (as the extremes of a continuum might be regarded as opposites, for the sake of argument).
The "domain" mapped by a functional narrative (one that, when enacted, produces the results desired)
might reasonably be regarded as "explored territory," as events that occur "there" are predictable. Any
place where enacted plans produce unexpected, threatening or punishing consequences, by contrast, might
be regarded as "unexplored territory." What happens "there" does not conform to our wishes. This means
30 








that a familiar place, where unpredictable things start happening, is no longer familiar (even though it
might be the same place with regards to its strict spatial location, from the "objective" perspective). We
know how to act in some places, and not in others. The plans we put into action sometimes work, and
sometimes do not work. The experiential domains we inhabit - our "environment," so to speak - are
therefore permanently characterized by the fact of the predictable and controllable, in paradoxical
juxtaposition with the unpredictable and uncontrollable. The universe is composed of "order" and "chaos"
- at least from the metaphorical perspective. Oddly enough, however, it is to this "metaphorical" universe
that our nervous system appears to have adapted.
Although the work of Sokolov and his colleagues29 has generated a substantial amount of interest in the
West, its effect on modern theories of human motivation and affect has been more limited than appears
appropriate. The present discussion has been designed to rectify that situation, and to expand upon
Sokolov's initial ideas, to the degree that is presently empirically and theoretically justifiable. What
Sokolov discovered, to put it bluntly, is that human beings (and other animals, far down the phylogenetic
chain) are characterized by an innate response to what they cannot predict, do not want, and can not
understand. Sokolov identified the central characteristics of how we respond to the unknown - to the
strange category of all events that have not yet been categorized. The notion that we respond in an
"instinctively patterned" manner to the appearance of the unknown has revolutionary implications. I would
like to begin this discussion in a manner somewhat removed from normal scientific discussion, but
appropriate to the topic at hand: by telling two stories.
2.1.1. Normal Life
"If problems are accepted,
and dealt with before they arise,
they might even be prevented before confusion begins.
In this way peace may be maintained."0
You work in an office; you are climbing the corporate ladder. Your daily activity reflects this superordinate
goal. You are constantly immersed in one activity or another, designed to produce an elevation in your
status, from the perspective of the corporate hierarchy. Today, you have to attend a meeting that may prove
vitally important to your future. You have an image in your head, so to speak, about the nature of that
meeting, and the interactions that will characterize it. You imagine what you would like to accomplish.
Your image of this potential future is a fantasy - but it is based, insofar as you are honest, on all the
relevant information, derived from past experience, that you have at your disposal. You have attended
many meetings. You know what is likely to happen, during any given meeting, within reasonable bounds;
you know how you will behave, and what effect your behavior will have on others. Your model of the
desired future is clearly predicated on what you currently know.
You also have a model of the present, constantly operative. You understand your (somewhat
subordinate) position within the corporation, which is your importance relative to others above and below
you in the hierarchy. You understand the significance of those experiences that occur regularly while you
are during your job: you know who you can give orders to, who you have to listen to, who is doing a good
job, who can safely be ignored, and so on. You are always comparing this present (unsatisfactory)
condition to that of your ideal, which is you, increasingly respected, powerful, rich, and happy, free of
anxiety and suffering, climbing towards your ultimate success. You are unceasingly involved in attempts to
transform the present, as you currently understand it, into the future, as you hope it will be. Your actions
are designed to produce your ideal - designed to transform the present into something ever more closely
resembling what you want. Your are confident in your model of reality, in your story; when you put it into
action, you get results.
You prepare yourself mentally for your meeting. You envision yourself playing a centrally important
role - resolutely determining the direction the meeting will take, producing a powerful impact on your co31










workers. You are in your office, preparing to leave. The meeting is taking place in another building, several
blocks away. You formulate provisional plans of behavior designed to get you there on time. You estimate
travel time at fifteen minutes.
You leave your office, on the twenty-seventh floor, and you wait by the elevator. The minutes tick by -
more and more of them. The elevator fails to appear. You had not taken this possibility into account. The
longer you wait, the more nervous you get. Your heart rate starts increasing, as you prepare for action
(action unspecified, as of yet). Your palms sweat. You flush. You start berating yourself for failing to
consider the potential impact of such a delay. Maybe you are not as smart as you think you are. Your model
of yourself begins to undergo a revision. No time for that now: you put such ideas out of your head, and
concentrate on the task at hand.
The unexpected has just become manifest - in the form of the missing elevator. You planned to take it to
get where you were going; it did not appear. Your original plan of action is not producing the effects
desired. It was, by your own definition, a bad plan. You need another one - and quickly. Luckily you have
an alternate strategy, at your disposal. The stairs! You dash to the rear of the building. You try the door to
the stairwell. It is locked. You curse the maintenance staff. You are frustrated and anxious. The unknown
has emerged, once again. You try another exit. Success! The door opens. Hope springs forth from your
breast. You still might make it on time. You rush down the stairs - all twenty-seven floors - and onto the
street.
You are, by now, desperately late. As you hurry along, you monitor your surroundings: is progress
towards your goal continuing? Anyone who gets in your way irritates you - differently-abled elderly ladies,
playful, happy children, lovers out for a stroll. You are a good person, under most circumstances - at least
in your own estimation. Why, then, then do these innocent people aggravate you so thoroughly? You near a
busy intersection. The cross-walk light is off. You fume and mutter away stupidly on the sidewalk. Your
blood pressure rises. The light finally changes. You smile, and dash forward. Up a slight rise you run. You
are not in great physical shape. Where did all this energy come from? You are approaching the target
building. You glance at your watch. Five minutes left: No problem. A feeling of relief and satisfaction
floods over you. You are there; in consequence, you are not an idiot. If you believed in God, you would
thank Him.
Had you been early - had you planned appropriately - the other pedestrians and assorted obstacles
would not have affected you at all. You might have even appreciated them - at least the good-looking ones
- or may at least not have classified them as obstacles. Maybe you would have even used the time to enjoy
your surroundings (unlikely), or to think about other issues of real importance - like tomorrow's meeting.
You continue on your path. Suddenly, you hear a series of loud noises behind you - noises reminiscent,
for the sake of argument, of a large motorized vehicle hurtling over a small concrete barrier (a barrier much
like a kerb). You are safe on the sidewalk - or so you presumed, a second ago. Your meeting-fantasies
vanish. The fact that you are late no longer seems relevant. You stop hurrying along, instantly, arrested in
your path by the emergence of this new phenomenon. Your auditory system localizes the sounds in three
dimensions. You involuntarily orient your trunk, neck, head and eyes towards the place in space from
which the sounds apparently emanate.31 Your pupils dilate, and your eyes widen.32 Your heart-rate speeds
up, as your body prepares to take adaptive action - once the proper path of that action has been specified.33
You actively explore the unexpected occurrence, once you have oriented towards it, with all the sensory
and cognitive resources you can muster. You are generating hypotheses about the potential cause of the
noise even before you turn. Has a van jumped the kerb? The image flashes through your mind. Has
something heavy fallen from a building? Has the wind overturned a billboard or street sign? Your eyes
actively scan the relevant area. You see a truck loaded with bridge parts heading down the street, just past a
pothole in the road. The mystery is solved. You have determined the specific motivational significance of
what just seconds ago was the dangerous and threatening unknown, and it is zero. A loaded truck hit a
bump. Big deal! Your heart slows down. Thoughts of the impending meeting re-enter the theatre of the
your mind. Your original journey continues, as if nothing has happened.
What is going on? Why are you frightened and frustrated by the absence of the expected elevator, the
presence of the old woman with the cane, the carefree lovers, the loud machinery? Why are you so
emotionally and behaviorally variable?
32 






Detailed description of the processes governing these common affective occurrences provides the basis
for proper understanding of human motivation. What Sokolov and his colleagues essentially discovered
was that the unknown, experienced in relationship to your currently extant model of present and future, has
a priori motivational significance - or, to put it somewhat differently, that the unknown could serve as an
unconditioned stimulus.
What is the a priori motivational significance of the unknown? Can such a question even be asked?
After all, the unknown has not yet been explored - by definition. Nothing can be said, by the dictates of
standard logic, about something that has not yet been encountered. We are not concerned with sensory
information, however - nor with particular material attributes - but with valence. Valence, in and of itself,
might be most simply considered as bipolar: negative or positive (or, of course, as neither). We are familiar
enough with the ultimate potential range of valence, negative and positive, to place provisional borders
around possibility. The worst the unknown could be, in general, is death (or, perhaps, lengthy suffering
followed by death); the fact of our vulnerable mortality provides the limiting case. The best the unknown
could be is more difficult to specify, but some generalizations might prove acceptable. We would like to be
wealthy (or at least free from want), possessed of good health, wise and well-loved. The greatest good the
unknown might confer, then, might be regarded as that which would allow us to transcend our innate
limitations (poverty, ignorance, vulnerability), rather than to remain miserably subject to them. The
emotional "area" covered by the unknown is therefore very large, ranging from that which we fear most to
that which we desire most intently.
The unknown is, of course, defined in contradistinction to the "known." Everything "not understood" or
"not explored" is unknown. The relationship between the oft- (and unfairly) separated domains of
"cognition" and "emotion" can be more clearly comprehended in light of this rather obvious fact. It is the
absence of an expected satisfaction, for example, that is punishing, hurtful34 - the emotion is generated as a
default response to sudden and unpredictable alteration in the theoretically comprehended structure of the
world. It is the man expecting a raise because of his outstanding work - the man configuring a desired
future on the basis of his understanding of the present - who is hurt when someone "less deserving" is
promoted before him ( "one is best punished," after all, "for one's virtues"5). The man whose expectations
have been dashed - who has been threatened and hurt - is likely to work less hard in the future, with more
resentment and anger. Conversely - the child who has not completed her homework is thrilled when the
bell signalling class end rings, before she is called upon. The bell signals the absence of an expected
punishment, and therefore induces positive affect, relief, happiness.36
It appears, therefore, that it is the image of a goal (a fantasy about the nature of the desired future,
conceived of in relationship to a model of the significance of the present) that provides a good part of the
framework determining the motivational significance of ongoing current events. The individual uses his or
her knowledge to construct a hypothetical state of affairs, where the motivational balance of ongoing events
is optimized: where there is sufficient satisfaction, minimal punishment, tolerable threat, and abundant
hope, all balanced together properly over the short and longer terms. This optimal state of affairs might be
conceptualized as a pattern of career advancement, with a long-term state in mind, signifying perfection, as
it might be attained profanely (richest drug dealer, happily married matron, chief executive officer of a
large corporation, tenured Harvard professor). Alternatively, perfection might be regarded as the absence of
all unnecessary things, and the pleasures of an ascetic life. The point is that some desirable future state of
affairs is conceptualized, in fantasy, and then used as a target point for operation in the present. Such
operations may be conceived of as links, in a chain (with the end of the chain anchored to the desirable
future state).
A meeting (like the one referred to previously) might be viewed by those participating in it as one link in
the chain which might hypothetically lead to the paradisal state of corporate Chief Executive Officer (or to
something less desirable, but still good). The (well-brought-off) meeting, as subgoal, would therefore have
the same motivational significance as the goal, although at lesser intensity (as it is only one small part of a
large and more important whole). The exemplary meeting will be conceptualized in the ideal - like all
target states - as a dynamic situation where, all things considered, motivational state is optimized. The
meeting is imagined - a representation of the desired outcome is formulated, and a plan of behavior
designed to bring about that outcome is elaborated and played out. The "imagined meeting" is fantasy, but
33 









fantasy based on past knowledge (assuming that knowledge has in fact been generated, and that the planner
is able and willing to use it).
The affective systems that govern response to punishment, satisfaction, threat and promise all have a
stake in attaining the ideal outcome. Anything that interferes with such attainment (little old ladies with
canes) will be experienced as threatening, and/or punishing; anything that signifies increased likelihood of
success (like an open stretch of sidewalk) will be experienced as promising37 or satisfying. It is for this
reason that the Buddhists believe that everything is Maya, or illusion:38 the motivational significance of
ongoing events is clearly determined by the nature of the goal towards which behavior is devoted. That
goal is conceptualized in episodic imagery - in fantasy. We constantly compare the world at present to the
world idealized in fantasy, render affective judgment, and act, in consequence. Trivial promises and
satisfactions indicate that we are doing well, are progressing towards our goals. An unexpected opening in
the flow of pedestrians appears before us, when we are in a hurry; we rush forward, pleased at the
occurrence. We get somewhere a little faster than we had planned, and feel satisfied with our intelligent
planning. Profound promises or satisfactions, by contrast, validate our global conceptualizations -indicate
that our emotions are likely to stay regulated, on the path we have chosen. Trivial threats or punishments
indicate flaws in our means of attaining desired ends. We modify our behavior accordingly, and eliminate
the threat. When the elevator does not appear at the desired time, we take the stairs. When a stop-light
slows us down, we run a bit faster, once it shuts off, than we might have otherwise. Profound threats and
punishments (read: trauma) have a qualitatively different nature. Profound threats or punishments
undermine our ability to believe that our conceptualizations of the present are valid and that our goals are
appropriate. Such occurrences disturb our belief in our ends (and, not infrequently, in our starting points).
We construct our idealized world, in fantasy, according to all the information we have at our disposal.
We use what we know to build an image of what we could have and, therefore, of what we should do. But
we compare our interpretation of the world as it unfolds in the present to the desired world, in imagination,
not to mere expectation; we compare what we have (in interpretation) to what we want, rather than to what
we merely think will be. Our goal-setting, and consequent striving, is motivated: we chase what we desire,
in our constant attempts to optimize our affective states. (Of course, we use our behavior to ensure that our
dreams come true; that is healthy "adaptation." But we still compare what is happening to what we want -
to what we desire to be - not merely to what we cold-bloodedly expect.)
The maps that configure our motivated behavior have a certain comprehensible structure. They contain
two fundamental and mutually interdependent poles, one present, the other, future. The present is sensory
experience as it is currently manifested to us - as we currently understand it - granted motivational
significance according to our current knowledge and desires. The future is an image or partial image of
perfection, to which we compare the present, insofar as we understand its significance. Wherever there
exists a mismatch between the two, the unexpected or novel occurs (by definition), grips our attention, and
activates the intrapsychic systems that govern fear and hope.39 We strive to bring novel occurrences back
into the realm of predictability, or to exploit them for previously unconsidered potential, by altering our
behavior, or our patterns of representation. We conceive of a path connecting present to future. This path is
"composed" of the behaviors required to produce the transformations we desire - required to turn the
(eternally) insufficient present into the (ever-receding) paradisal future. This path is normally conceived of
as linear, so to speak, as something analogous to Thomas Kuhn's40 notion of normal science, wherein
known patterns of behavior operating upon an understood present will produce a future, whose desirability
is an unquestioned given.
Anything that interferes with our potential means, to a specified end, is punishing or threatening, in the
rather trivial sense described previously. Encounter with punishments or threats of this category merely
oblige us to choose an alternative mean, from among the number we generally have present. A similar
situation obtains for promises and satisfactions. When a means produces the end desired (or furthers
progress along that path) we experience satisfaction (and hope - as an interim end accomplished also
signifies increased likelihood of success, farther out in the future). Such satisfaction brings our particular
behaviors to an end; we switch goals, and continue into the future. Modification of our means, as a
consequence of the motivational significance of the outcomes of those means, might be considered normal
adaptation. The structure of normal adaptation is schematically portrayed in Figure 3: Normal Life. We
posit a goal, in image and word, and we compare present conditions to that goal. We evaluate the


significance of ongoing events in light of their perceived relationship to the goal. We modify our behavioral
outputs - our means - when necessary, to make the attainment of our goal ever more likely. We modify our
actions within the game, but accept the rules without question. We move in a linear direction from present
to future.

2.1.2. Revolutionary Life
The revolutionary model of adaptation - again, considered akin to Kuhn's41 revolutionary science - is more
complex. Let us presume that you return from your meeting. You made it on time and, as far as you could
tell, everything proceeded according to plan. You noticed that your colleagues appeared a little irritated and
confused by your behavior, as you attempted to control the situation, but you put this down to jealousy on
their part - to their inability to comprehend the majesty of your conceptualizations. You are satisfied, in
consequence - satisfied temporarily - so you start thinking about tomorrow, as you walk back to work. You
return to your office. There is a message on your answering machine. The boss wants to see you. You did
not expect this. Your heart rate speeds up a little: good or bad, this news demands preparation for action.
42
What does she want? Fantasies of potential future spring up. Maybe she heard about your behavior at the
meeting, and wants to congratulate you on your excellent work. You walk to her office, apprehensive but
hopeful.
You knock, and stroll in jauntily. The boss looks at you, and glances away somewhat unhappily. Your
sense of apprehension increases. She motions for you to sit, so you do. What is going on? She says, "I have
some bad news for you." This is not good. This is not what you wanted. Your heart rate is rising
unpleasantly. You focus all of your attention on your boss. "Look," she says, "I have received a number of
35 









very unfavorable reports regarding your behavior at meetings. All of your colleagues seem to regard you as
a rigid and overbearing negotiator. Furthermore, it has become increasingly evident that you are unable to
respond positively to feedback about your shortcomings. Finally, you do not appear to properly understand
the purpose of your job, or the function of this corporation."
You are shocked, beyond belief - paralyzed into immobility. Your vision of the future with this
company vanishes, replaced by apprehensions of unemployment, social disgrace and failure. You find it
difficult to breathe. You flush, and perspire profusely; your face is a mask of barely suppressed horror. You
cannot believe that your boss is such a bitch. "You have been with us for five years," she continues, "and it
is obvious that your performance is not likely to improve. You are definitely not suited for this sort of
career, and you are interfering with the progress of the many competent others around you. In consequence,
we have decided to terminate your contract with us, effective immediately. If I were you, I would take a
good look at myself."
You have just received unexpected information, but of a different order of magnitude than the petty
anomalies, irritations, threats and frustrations that disturbed your equilibrium in the morning. You have just
been presented with incontrovertible evidence that your characterizations of the present and of the ideal
future are seriously - perhaps irreparably - flawed. Your presumptions about the nature of the world are in
error. The world you know has just crumbled around you. Nothing is what it seemed; everything is
unexpected and new again. You leave the office in shock. In the hallway, other employees avert their gaze
from you, in embarrassment. Why did you not see this coming? How could you have been so mistaken in
your judgment?
Maybe everyone is out to get you.
Better not think that.
You stumble home, in a daze, and collapse on the couch. You can't move. You are hurt and terrified.
You feel like you might go insane. Now what? How will you face people? The comfortable, predictable,
rewarding present has vanished. The future has opened up in front of you like a pit, and you have fallen in.
For the next month, you find yourself unable to act. Your spirit has been extinguished. You sleep and wake
at odd hours; your appetite is disturbed. You are anxious, hopeless and aggressive, at unpredictable
intervals. You snap at your family, and torture yourself. Suicidal thoughts enter the theatre of your
imagination. You do not know what to think, or what to do: you are the victim of an internal war of
emotion.
Your encounter with the terrible unknown has shaken the foundations of your world-view. You have
been exposed, involuntarily, to the unexpected and revolutionary. Chaos has eaten your soul. This means
that your long term goals have to be reconstructed, and the motivational significance of events in your
current environment, re-evaluated - literally: revalued. This capacity for complete revaluation, in the light
of new information, is even more particularly human than the aforementioned capability for exploration of
the unknown and generation of new information. Sometimes, in the course of our actions, we elicit
phenomena whose very existence is impossible, according to our standard methods of construal (which are
at base a mode of attributing motivational significance to events). Exploration of these new phenomena,
and integration of our findings into our knowledge, occasionally means reconceptualization of that
knowledge43 (and consequent re-exposure to the unknown, no longer inhibited by our mode of
classification).44 This means that simple movement from present to future is occasionally interrupted by a
complete breakdown and reformulation: is occasionally interrupted by re-constitution of what the present is
and what the future should be. The ascent of the individual, so to speak, is punctuated by periods of
"dissolution and rebirth."45 The more general model of human adaptation - conceptualized most simply as
steady state, breach, crisis, redress46 - therefore ends up looking like 
A month after you were fired, a new idea finds its way into your head. Although you never let yourself
admit it, previously, you didn't really like that bloody job. You only took it because you felt that it was
expected of you. You never put your full effort into it, because you really wanted to do something else -
something other people thought was risky, or foolish. You made a bad decision, a long time ago. Maybe
you needed this blow, to put you back on the path. You start imagining a new future - one where you are
not so "secure," maybe, but where you are doing what you actually want to do. The possibility of
undisturbed sleep returns, and you start eating properly again. You are quieter, less arrogant, more
accepting - except in your weaker moments. Others make remarks, some admiring, some envious, about
the change they perceive in you. You are a man recovering from a long illness - a man reborn.
2.2. Neuropsychological Function: The Nature of the Mind
It is reasonable to regard the world, as forum for action, as a "place" - a place made up of the familiar,
and the unfamiliar, in eternal juxtaposition. The brain is actually composed, in large part, of two
subsystems, adapted for action in that place. The right hemisphere, broadly speaking, responds to novelty
with caution, and rapid, global "hypothesis-formation." The left hemisphere, by contrast, tends to remain
"in charge" when things - that is, explicitly categorized things - are unfolding according to plan. The right
hemisphere draws rapid, global, valence-based "metaphorical" pictures of novel things; the left, with its
greater capacity for detail, makes such pictures explicit and verbal. Thus the exploratory capacity of the
brain "builds" the world of the familiar (of the known), from the world of the unfamiliar (the unknown).
37 



When the world remains known and familiar - that is, when our beliefs maintain their validity - our
emotions remain under control. When the world suddenly transforms itself into something new, however,
our emotions are dysregulated, in keeping with the relative novelty of that transformation, and we are
forced to retreat, or to explore once again.
2.2.1. The Valence of Things
"...anyone who considers the basic drives of man.... will find that all of them have done philosophy at some
time - and that every one of them would like only too well to represent just itself as the ultimate purpose of
existence and the legitimate master of all the other drives. For every drive wants to be master - and it
attempts to philosophize in that spirit."49
"It is true that man was created in order to serve the gods, who, first of all, needed to be fed and
clothed."50
We can make lists of general goods and bads, which might appear reasonable to others, because we tend to
make judgments of meaning in a relatively standard and predictable way. Food, to take a simple example,
is good, assuming it is palatably prepared, while a blow on the head is bad, in direct proportion to its force.
The list of general goods and bads can be extended with little effort. Water, shelter, warmth, and sexual
contact are good; diseases, droughts, famines and fights are bad. The essential similarities of our judgments
of meaning can easily lead us to conclude that the goodness or badness of things or situations is something
more or less fixed. However, the fact of subjective interpretation - and its effects on evaluation and
behavior - complicate this simple picture. We will work, expend energy, and overcome obstacles, to gain a
good (or to avoid something bad). But we won't work for food, if we have enough food - at least not very
hard; we won't work for sex, if we are satisfied with our present levels of sexual activity, and we might be
very pleased to go hungry, if that means our enemy will starve. Our predictions, expectations, and desires
condition our evaluations, to a finally unspecifiable degree. Things have no absolutely fixed significance,
despite our ability to generalize about their value. It is our personal preferences, therefore, that determine
the import of the world (but these preferences have constraints!).
The meaning we attribute to objects or situations is not stable. What is important to one man is not
necessarily important to another; likewise, the needs and desires of the child differ from those of the adult.
The meaning of things depends to a profound and ultimately undeterminable degree upon the relationship
of those things to the goal we currently have in mind. Meaning shifts when goals change. Such change
necessarily transforms the contingent expectations and desires that accompany those goals. We experience
"things" personally and idiosyncratically, despite broad interpersonal agreement about the value of things.
The goals we pursue singly - the outcomes we expect and desire as individuals - determine the meaning of
our experience. The existential psychotherapist Viktor Frankl relates a story regarding his experiences as a
Nazi death camp inmate, which makes this point most strikingly:
"Take as an example something that happened on our journey from Auschwitz to the camp affiliated
with Dachau. We became more and more tense as we approached a certain bridge over the Danube
which the train would have to cross to reach Mauthausen, according to the statement of experienced
traveling companions. Those who have never seen anything similar cannot possibly imagine the dance
of joy performed in the carriage by the prisoners when they saw that our transport was not crossing the
bridge and was instead heading "only" for Dachau.
And again, what happened on our arrival in that camp, after a journey lasting two days and three
nights? There had not been enough room for everybody to crouch on the floor of the carriage at the same
time. The majority of us had to stand all the way, while a few took turns at squatting on the scanty straw
which was soaked with human urine. When we arrived the first important news that we heard from older
prisoners was that this comparatively small camp (its population was 2500) had no "oven," no
38 




crematorium, no gas! That meant that a person who had become a "Moslem" [no longer fit for work]
could not be taken straight to the gas chamber, but would have to wait until a so-called "sick convoy"
had been arranged to return to Auschwitz. This joyful surprise put us all in a good mood. The wish of
the senior warden of our hut in Auschwitz had come true: we had come, as quickly as possible, to a
camp which did not have a "chimney" - unlike Auschwitz. We laughed and cracked jokes in spite of,
and during, all we had to go through in the next few hours.
When we new arrivals were counted, one of us was missing. So we had to wait outside in the rain and
cold wind until the missing man was found. He was at last discovered in a hut, where he had fallen
asleep from exhaustion. Then the roll call was turned into a punishment parade. All through the night
and late into the next morning, we had to stand outside, frozen and soaked to the skin after the strain of
our long journey. And yet we were all very pleased! There was no chimney in this camp and Auschwitz
was a long way off."51
Nothing produces terror and fear like a concentration camp - unless the camp encountered is better than the
camp expected. Our hopes, desires, and wishes - which are always conditional - define the context within
which the things and situations we encounter take on determinate significance; define even the context
within which we understand "thing" or "situation." We presume that things have a more-or-less fixed
meaning, because we share a more-or-less fixed "condition" with others - at least with those others who are
familiar to us, who share our presumptions and world-views. Those (culturally-determined) things we take
for granted - and which are, therefore, invisible - determine our affective responses to "environmental
stimuli." We assume that such things are permanent attributes of the world; but they are not. Our situations
- and, therefore, our "contexts of interpretation" - can change dramatically, at any moment. We are indeed
fortunate (and, generally, oblivious of that fortune) when they do not.
It is not possible to finally determine either how or whether something is meaningful, by observing the
objective features of that thing. Value is not invariant, in contrast to objective reality; furthermore, it is not
possible to derive an ought from an is (this is the "naturalistic fallacy" of David Hume). It is possible,
however, to determine the conditional meaning of something, by observing how behavior (one's own
behavior, or someone else's) is conducted in the presence of that thing (or, in its absence). "Things"
(objects, processes) emerge - into subjective experience, at least - as a consequence of behaviors. Let us
say, for the sake of example, that behavior "a" produces phenomenon "b" (always remembering that we are
talking about behavior in a particular context). Behavior "a" consequently increases in frequency. It can be
deduced, then, that phenomenon "b" is regarded as positive, by the agent under observation, in the
particular "context" constituting the observed situation. If behavior "a" decreases in frequency, the opposite
conclusion can be reasonably reached. The observed agent regards "b" as negative.
The behavioral psychologist B.F. Skinner52 originally defined a reinforcer as a "stimulus" which
produced a change in the frequency of a given behavior. He was loathe to become concerned with the
"internal" or "intrapsychic" whys and wherefores of reinforcement, preferring instead to work by
definition. If a "stimulus" increased the rate at which a given behavior was manifested, it was positive. If it
decreased the rate of that behavior, it was negative. Of course, Skinner recognized that the valence of a
given "stimulus" was context-dependent. An animal had to be "food-deprived" (in normal parlance,
hungry) before food, for example, could serve as a positive reinforcer. And, as the animal being fed became
less "food-deprived," the valence and potency of the reinforcer food decreased.
Skinner believed that discussions of an animal's (or a human's) internal state were unnecessary. If you
knew an animal's reinforcement history, you could determine what "stimuli" were likely to have positive or
negative valence. The fundamental problem with this argument is one of parsimony. It is impossible to
know an animal's "reinforcement history" - particularly if that animal is as complex and long-lived as a
human being. This is tantamount to saying, "you must know everything that has ever happened to that
animal"; analogous to the old determinist claim that "if you knew the present position and momentum of
every particle in the universe, you could determine all future positions and momenta." You can't know all
present positions, etc. - the measurement problems are insurmountable, and the uncertainty principle makes
it impossible anyway. Likewise, you don't have access to the "reinforcement history," - and, even if you
39 




did, measuring it would alter it. (I am not making an formal "uncertainty" claim for psychology; just
drawing what I hope is a useful analogy).
Skinner addressed this problem by limiting his concern to experimental situations so simple that only
immediate reinforcement history played a context-determining role. This "implicit" limit enabled him to
sidestep the fundamental issue, and to make inappropriate generalizations. It didn't matter how a rat related
to his mother, six months earlier, if you could make him "food-deprived" enough. The (short-term) fact of
the food deprivation, for example, overrode individual rat differences - at least in the experimental
condition under question - and could therefore usefully be ignored. Similarly, if you starve human beings,
you can be reasonably sure that they will become concerned with food. However, even in this extreme case,
you cannot predict how this concern will manifest itself, or what (ethical) considerations might play an
intermediate, or even determining, role. Alexander Solzhenitsyn examined this very problem during the
time he spent in the Soviet "Gulag Archipelago" (the Soviet prison camp system):
"At the Samarka Camp in 1946 a group of intellectuals had reached the very brink of death: They were
worn down by hunger, cold, and work beyond their powers. And they were even deprived of sleep. They
had nowhere to lie down. Dugout barracks had not yet been built. Did they go and steal? Or squeal? Or
whimper about their ruined lives? No! Foreseeing the approach of death in days rather than weeks, here
is how they spent their last sleepless leisure, sitting up against the wall: Timofeyev-Ressovsky gathered
them into a "seminar," and they hastened to share with one another what one of them knew and the
others did not - they delivered their last lectures to each other. Father Savely - spoke of "unshameful
death," a priest academician - about patristics, one of the Uniate fathers - about something in the area of
dogmatics and canonical writings, an electrical engineer - on the principles of the energetics of the
future, and a Leningrad economist - on how the effort to create principles of Soviet economics had
failed for lack of new ideas. From one session to the next, participants were missing - they were already
in the morgue.
That is the sort of person who can be interested in all this while already growing numb with

approaching death - now that is an intellectual!"53

Past experience - learning - does not merely condition; rather, such experience determines the precise
nature of the "framework of reference" or "context" that will be brought to bear on the analysis of a given
situation. This "cognitive frame of reference" acts as the intermediary between past learning, present
experience, and future desire. This intermediary is a valid object of scientific exploration - a phenomenon
as real as anything "abstracted" is real - and is far more parsimonious and accessible, as such a
phenomenon, than the simple "non-interpreted" (and non-measurable, in any case) "sum total of
reinforcement history." "Frameworks of reference," influenced in their structure by learning, specify the
valence of ongoing experience; determine what might be regarded, in a given time and place, as good, bad,
or indifferent. Furthermore, inferences about the nature of the "framework of reference" governing the
behavior of others (that is, looking at the world through the eyes of another) may produce results that are
more useful, more broadly generalizable (as "insights" into the "personality" of another), and less
demanding of cognitive resources than attempts to understand the details of a given "reinforcement
history."
Valence can be positive, or negative, as the early behaviorists noted. "Positive" and "negative" are not
opposite ends of a continuum, however - not in any straightforward way.54 The two "states" appear
orthogonal, although (perhaps) mutually inhibitory. Furthermore, "positive" and "negative" are not simple:
each can be subdivided, in a more or less satisfactory manner, at least once. Positively valued things, for
example, can be satisfying or promising (can serve as consummatory or incentive rewards, respectively55).
Many satisfying things are consumable, in the literal sense, as outlined previously. Food, for example, is a
consummatory reward to the hungry - which means that it is valued under such circumstances as a
satisfaction. Likewise, water satisfies the man deprived of liquid. Sexual contact is rewarding to the lustful,
and warmth is desirable to those without shelter. Sometimes more complex stimuli are satisfying, or
rewarding, as well. It all depends on what is presently desired, and how that desire plays itself out. A mild
verbal reprimand might well foster feelings of relief in the individual who expects a severe physical beating
- which is to say, technically, that the absence of an expected punishment can serve quite effectively as a
40 








reward (it is in fact the form of reward that the tyrant prefers). Regardless of their form, attained
satisfactions produce satiation, calm and somnolent pleasure, and (temporary) cessation of the behaviors
directed to that particular end - although behaviors which culminate in a satisfactory conclusion are more
likely to be manifested, in the future, when "instinctive" or "voluntary" desire re-emerges.
Promises, which are also positive, might be regarded as more abstractly meaningful than satisfactions,
as they indicate potential, rather than actuality. Promises - cues of consummatory rewards, or satisfactions
- indicate the imminent attainment of something desired, or potentially desirable. Their more abstract
quality does not make them "secondary" or necessarily learned, however, as was once thought; our
response to potential satisfaction is often as "basic" or "primary" as our response to satisfaction itself.
Promises (cues of satisfaction) have been regarded, technically, as incentive rewards, because they induce
forward locomotion - which is merely movement towards the place that the cue indicates satisfaction will
occur. 56 Curiosity,57 hope58 and excited pleasure tend to accompany exposure to cues of reward (and are
associated with subsequent forward locomotion).59 Behaviors that produce promises - like those that result
in satisfactions - also increase in frequency, over time.60
Negatively valued things - which have a structure that mirrors those of their positive counterparts - can
either be punishing, or threatening.
61 Punishments - a diverse group of stimuli or contexts, as defined
immediately below - all appear to share one feature in common (at least from the perspective of the theory
outlined in this manuscript): they indicate the temporary of final impossibility of the implementation of one
or more means, or the attainment of one or more desired ends. Some stimuli are almost universally
experienced as punishing, because their appearance indicates reduced likelihood of carrying through
virtually any imaginable plan - of obtaining almost every satisfaction, or potential desirable future. Most
things or situations that produce bodily injury fall into this category. More generally, punishments might be
conceived of as involuntary states of deprivation (of food, or water, or optimal temperature,62 of social
contact63); as disappointments64 or frustrations65 (which are absences of expected rewards66), and as
"stimuli" sufficiently intense to produce damage to the systems encountering them. Punishments stop
action, or induce retreat or escape (backward locomotion),67 and engender the emotional state commonly
known as pain or hurt. Behaviors, which culminate in punishment and subsequent hurt, tend to extinguish -
to decrease in frequency, over time.68
Threats, which are also negative, indicate potential, like promises - but potential for punishment, for
hurt, for pain. Threats - cues of punishment - are stimuli that indicate enhanced likelihood of punishment
and hurt.69 Threats are abstract, like promises; however, like promises, they are not necessarily secondary
or "learned."0 Unexpected phenomena, for example - which constitute "innately recognizable" threats -
stop us in our tracks, and make us feel anxiety.
71 So, arguably, do certain "innate fear stimuli" - like
snakes.72 Behaviors that culminate in the production of cues of punishment - that create situations
characterized by anxiety - tend to decrease in frequency over time (much like those that produce immediate
punishment).73
Satisfactions and their cues are good, simply put; punishments and threats are bad. We tend to move
forward74 (to feel hope, curiosity, joy), and then to "consume" (to make love, to eat, to drink), in the
presence of good things; and to pause (and feel anxious), then withdraw, move backwards (and feel pain,
disappointment, frustration, loneliness), when faced by things we do not like. In the most basic of situations
- when we know what we are doing; when we are engaged with the familiar - these fundamental
tendencies suffice. Our actual situations, however, are almost always more complex. If things or situations
were straightforwardly or simply positive or negative, good or bad, we would not have to make judgments
regarding them; would not have to think about our behavior, and how and when it should be modified -
indeed, would not have to think at all. We are faced, however, with the constant problem of ambivalence in
meaning, which is to say that a thing or situation might be bad and good simultaneously (or good in two
conflicting manners; or bad, in two conflicting manners).75 A cheesecake, for example, is good when
considered from the perspective of food deprivation or hunger, but bad when considered from the
perspective of social desirability and the svelte figure that such desirability demands. The newly toilettrained
little boy who has just wet his bed might well feel simultaneous satisfaction, at the attainment of a
biologically vital goal, and apprehension, as to the likely interpersonal socially-constructed consequence of
that satisfaction. Nothing comes without a cost, and the cost has to be factored in, when the meaning of
something is evaluated. Meaning depends on context; contexts - stories, in a word - constitute goals,
41 







desires, wishes. It is unfortunate, from the perspective of conflict-free adaptation, that we have many goals
- many stories, many visions of the ideal future - and that the pursuit of one often interferes with our
chances (or someone else's chances) of obtaining another.
We solve the problem of contradictory meanings by interpreting the value of things from within the
confines of our stories - which are adjustable maps of experience and potential, whose specific contents are
influenced by the demands of our physical being. Our central nervous systems are made up of many "hardwired"
or automatized subsystems, responsible for biological regulation - for maintaining homeostasis of
temperature, ensuring proper caloric intake, and monitoring levels of plasma carbon dioxide (for example).
Each of these subsystems has a job to do. If that job is not done, within a certain variable span of time, the
whole game comes to a halt, perhaps permanently. Nothing gets accomplished then. We must therefore
perform certain actions - by necessity - if we are to survive. This does not mean, however, that our
behaviors are determined - at least not in any simplistic manner. The subsystems that make up our shared
structure - responsible, when operative, for our "instincts" (thirst, hunger, joy, lust, anger, etc.) - do not
appear to directly grip control of our behavior, do not transform us into driven automatons. Rather, they
appear to influence our fantasies, our plans, and alter and modify the content and comparative importance
of our goals, our ideal futures (conceived of in comparison to our "unbearable" presents, as they are
currently construed).
Each "basic" subsystem has its own particular, singular image of what constitutes the ideal, so to speak
- of what constitutes the most valid goal, at any given moment. If someone has not eaten in several days, it
is highly likely that his vision of the (immediately) desirable future will include the image of eating.
Likewise, if someone been deprived of water, she is likely to make drinking her goal. We share
fundamental biological structure, as human beings, so we tend to agree, broadly, about what should be
regarded as valuable (at least in a specified context). What this means, essentially, is that we can make
probabilistic estimates about those things that a given individual (and a given culture) might regard as
desirable, at any moment. Furthermore, we can increase the accuracy of our estimates by programmed
deprivation (because such deprivation specifies interpretive context). Nonetheless, we can never be sure, in
the complex normal course of events, just what it is that someone will want.
Judgment regarding the significance of things or situations becomes increasingly complicated when the
fulfillment of one biologically-predicated goal interferes with the pursuit or fulfillment of another.76 To
what end should we devote our actions, for example, when we are simultaneously lustful and guilty, or
cold, thirsty, and frightened? What if the only way to obtain food is to steal it, say, from someone equally
hungry, weaker and dependent? How is our behavior guided, when our desires compete - which is to say,
when wanting one thing makes us likely to lose another, or several others? There is no reason to presume,
after all, that each of our particularly specialized subsystems will agree, at any one time, about what
constitutes the most immediately desirable "good." This lack of easy agreement makes us intrinsically
prone to intrapsychic conflict, and associated affective (emotional) dysregulation. We manipulate our
environments, and our beliefs, to address this conflict - we change ourselves, or the things around us, to
increase our hope and satisfaction, and to decrease our fear and pain.
It is up to the "higher" cortical systems - the phylogenetically newer, more "advanced" executive77
portions of the brain - to render judgment about the relative value of desired states (and, similarly, to
determine the proper order, for the manifestation of means78). These advanced systems must take all states
of desire into account, optimally, and determine the appropriate path for the expression of that desire. We
make decisions about what is to be regarded as valuable, at any given time, but the neurological subsystems
that keep us alive, which are singularly responsible for our maintenance, in different aspects, all have a
voice in those decisions - a vote. Every part of us, kingdom that we are, depends on the healthy operation
of every other part. To ignore one good, therefore, is to risk all. To ignore the demands of one necessary
subsystem is merely to ensure that it will speak later with the voice of the unjustly oppressed; to ensure that
it will grip our fantasy, unexpectedly, and make of the future something unpredictable. Our "optimal paths"
therefore, must be properly inclusive, from the perspective of our internal community - from the
perspective of our basic physiology. The valuations and actions of others, additionally, influence our
personal states of emotion and motivation, as we pursue our individual goals, inevitably, in a social context.
The goal, writ large, towards which our higher systems work must therefore be construction of a state
where all our "needs" - and the "needs of others" - are simultaneously met. This higher goal, to which we
42 









all theoretically aspire, is a complex (and oft-implicit) fantasy - a vision or map of the promised land. This
map, this story - this framework of reference, or context of interpretation - is the (ideal) future, contrasted
necessarily with the (unbearable) present, and includes concrete plans, designed to turn the latter into the
former. The mutable meanings that make up our lives depend for their nature on the explicit structure of
this interpretive context.
We select what we should value, from among those things we must value. Our selections are, therefore,
predictable - in the broad sense. This must be, as we must perform certain actions in order to live. But the
predictability is limited. The world is complex enough not only so that a given problem may have many
valid solutions, but so that even the definition of "solution" may vary. The particular "most appropriate or
likely" choices of people, including ourselves, cannot therefore be accurately determined beforehand (not
under normal circumstances, at least). Nonetheless - despite our final and ineradicable ignorance - we act -
judging from moment to moment what is to be deemed worthy of pursuit; determining what can be ignored,
at least temporarily, during that pursuit. We are capable of acting - and of producing the results we desire -
because we render judgment of value, using every bit of information at our disposal. We determine that
something is worth having, at a given time and place, and make the possession of that thing our goal. And
as soon as something has become "our goal" - no matter what that something is - it appears to adopt the
significance of satisfaction (of consummatory reward). It appears sufficient for something to be truly
regarded as valuable, for it to adopt the emotional aspect of value. It is in this manner that our higher-order
verbal-cognitive systems serve to regulate our emotions. It is for this reason that we can play - that we can
work towards "merely symbolic" ends; for this reason that drama and literature79 (and even sporting events)
can have such profound "vicarious" effects on us. The mere fact that something is desired, however, does
not necessarily mean that its attainment will sustain life (as a "true" satisfaction might) - or that pure regard
will make something into what it is not. It is therefore necessary (if you wish to exist, that is) to construct
goals - models of the desired future - that are reasonable, so to speak, from the perspective of previous
experience, grounded in biological necessity. Such goals take into account the necessity of coping with our
intrinsic limitations; of satisfying our inherited biological subsystems; of appeasing those transpersonal
"gods," who eternally demand to be clothed and fed.
The fact that goals should be reasonable, broadly speaking, does not necessarily mean that they will be,
or that they have to be (at least in the short term) - or that what constitutes "reasonable" can be easily or
finally determined. One man's meat is another man's poison; the contents of the ideal future (and the
interpreted present) may and do vary dramatically between individuals. An anorexic, for example, makes
her goal an emaciation of figure that may well be incompatible with life. In consequence, she regards food
as something to be avoided - as something punishing, or threatening. This belief will not protect her from
starving, although it will powerfully affect her short-term determination of the valence of chocolate. The
man obsessed with power may sacrifice everything - including his family - to the attainment of his narrow
ambition. The empathic consideration of others, a time-consuming business, merely impedes his progress
with regards to those things he deems of ultimate value. His faith in the value of his progress therefore
makes threat and frustration even of love. Our beliefs, in short, can change our reactions to everything -
even to those things as "primary" or fundamental as food and family. We remain indeterminately
constrained, however, by the fact of our biological limits.
It is particularly difficult to specify the value of an occurrence when it has one meaning, from one frame
of reference (with regards to one particular goal), and a different or even opposite meaning, from another
equally equally or more important and relevant frame. "Stimuli" that exist in this manner constitute
unsolved problems of adaptation - still present us with a mystery, which is what to do in their presence
(whether to pause, consume, stop, or move backwards or forwards, at the most basic of levels; whether to
feel anxious, satisfied, hurt, or hopeful). Some things or situations may be evidently satisfying or punishing
- at least from the currently extant "framework of reference" - and can therefore be regarded (valued, acted
towards) in an uncomplicated manner. Other things and situations, however, remain rife with contradictory
or indeterminate meanings. (Many things, for example, are punishing in the "short term" but satisfying or
promising in the "medium" to "long term.") Such circumstances provide evidence that our systems of
valuation are not yet sophisticated enough to foster complete adaptation - demonstrate to us
incontrovertibly that our processes of evaluation are still incomplete:
43 


"A brain in a vat is at the wheel of a runaway trolley, approaching a fork in the track. The brain is
hooked up to the trolley in such a way that the brain can determine which course the trolley will take.
There are only two options: the right side of the fork, or the left side. There is no way to derail or stop
the trolley, and the brain is aware of this. On the right side of the track there is a single railroad worker,
Jones, who will definitely be killed if the brain steers the trolley to the right. If Jones lives he will go on
to kill five men for the sake of thirty orphans (one of the five men he will kill is planning to destroy a
bridge that the orphans' bus will be crossing later that night). One of the orphans who will be killed
would have grown up to become a tyrant who made good, utilitarian men do bad things, another would
have become John Sununu, a third would have invented the pop-top can.
If the brain in the vat chooses the left side of the track, the trolley will definitely hit and kill another
railman, Leftie, and will hit and destroy ten beating hearts on the track that would have been
transplanted into ten patients at the local hospital who will die without donor hearts. These are the only
hearts available, and the brain is aware of this. If the railman on the left side of the track lives, he, too,
will kill five men - in fact, the same five that the railman on the right would kill. However, Leftie will
kill the five as an unintended consequence of saving ten men: he will inadvertently kill the five men as
he rushes the ten hearts to the local hospital for transplantation. A further result of Leftie's act is that the
busload of orphans will be spared. Among the five men killed by Leftie is the man responsible for
putting the brain at the controls of the trolley. If the ten hearts and Leftie are killed by the trolley, the ten
prospective heart-transplant patients will die and their kidneys will be used to save the lives of twenty
kidney transplant patients, one of whom will grow up to cure cancer and one of whom will grow up to
be Hitler. There are other kidneys and dialysis machines available, but the brain does not know this.
Assume that the brain's choice, whatever it turns out to be, will serve as an example to other brains in
vats, and thus the effects of its decision will be amplified. Also assume that if the brain chooses the right
side of the fork, an unjust war free of war crimes will ensue, whereas if the brain chooses the left fork, a
just war fraught with war crimes will result. Furthermore, there is an intermittently active Cartesian
demon deceiving the brain in such a way that the brain is never sure that it is being deceived.
Question: Ethically speaking, what should the brain do?"80
We cannot act in two ways at one time - cannot move forwards and backwards, cannot stop and go,
simultaneously. When faced with stimuli, whose meaning is indeterminate, we are therefore placed in
conflict. Such conflict must be resolved, before adaptive action may take place. We can actually only do
one thing, at one time - although we may be motivated by confusing, threatening, dangerous or
unpredictable circumstances to attempt many incommensurate things simultaneously.
2.2.2. Unexplored Territory: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
The dilemma of contradictory simultaneous meanings can only be solved in one of two related ways
(although it can be avoided in many others). We can alter our behaviors, in the difficult situation, so that
those behaviors no longer produce consequences we do not desire or cannot interpret. Alternatively, we can
reframe our contexts of evaluation (our goals and our interpretations of the present), so that they no longer
produce paradoxical implications, with regards to the significance of a given situation. These processes of
behavioral modification and reframing constitute acts of effortful revaluation, which means thorough,
exploratory reconsideration of what has been judged previously to be appropriate or important.
Things or situations with indeterminate meanings therefore challenge our adaptive competence; force us
to revaluate our present circumstances, and alter our ongoing behaviors. Such circumstances arise when
something we have under control, from one perspective, is troublesome or otherwise out of control from
another. "Out of control" means, most basically, unpredictable: something is beyond us when our
interactions with it produce phenomena whose properties could not be determined, beforehand. Unexpected
or novel occurrences, which emerge when our plans do not turn out the way we hope they would, therefore
constitute an important - perhaps the most important - subset of the broader class of stimuli of
indeterminate meaning. Something unexpected, or novel, necessarily occurs in relationship to what is
44 













known - is always identified and evaluated with respect to our currently operative plan [which is to say that
a "familiar" thing, in an unexpected place (or at an unexpected time) is actually something unfamiliar]. The
wife of an adulterous husband, for example, is familiar to him, perhaps, when she is at home. The fact of
her, and her behavior, constitutes explored territory, so to speak. She is an entirely different sort of
phenomenon, however, from the perspective of affect (and implication for behavioral output), if she makes
an unexpected appearance at his favorite motel room, in the midst of a tryst. What will the husband do, in
his wife's presence, when she surprises him? First, he will be taken aback, in all likelihood - then he will
concoct a story, that makes sense of his behavior (if he can manage it, on such short notice). He has to think
up something new; has to do something he has never done before. He has to manage his wife, who he
thinks he has fooled - his wife, whose mere unexpected presence at the motel is proof of her endless
residual mystery. Our habitual patterns of action only suffice for things and situations of determinate
significance - by definition: we only know how to act in the presence of the familiar. The appearance of the
unexpected pops us out of "unconscious," axiomatic complacency, and forces us (painfully) to think.
The implications of novel or unpredictable occurrences are unknown, by definition. This observation
carries within it the seeds of a difficult and useful question: what, is the significance of the unknown? It
might seem logical to assume that the answer is none - something unexplored cannot have meaning,
because none has yet been attributed to it. The truth, however, is precisely opposite. Those things we do not
understand nonetheless signify. If you can't tell what something means, because you don't know what it is,
what then does it mean? It is not nothing - we are in fact frequently and predictably upset by the
unexpected. Rather, it could be anything - and that is precisely the crux of the problem. Unpredictable
things are not irrelevant, prior to the determination of their specific meaning. Things we have not yet
explored have significance, prior to our adaptation to them, prior to our classification of their relevance,
prior to our determination of their implication for behavior. Things not predicted, not desired, that occur
while we are carrying out our carefully designed plans - such things come loaded, a priori, with meaning,
both positive and negative. The appearance of unexpected things or situations indicates, at least, that our
plans are in error, at some stage of their design - in some trivial way, if we are lucky; in some manner that
might be devastating to our hopes and wishes, to our self-regard, if we are not.
Unexpected or unpredictable things - novel things, more exactly (the class of novel things, most
particularly) - have a potentially infinite, unbounded range of significance. What does something that
might be anything mean? In the extremes, it means - the worst that could be (or, at least, the worst you can
imagine) and, conversely, the best that could be (or the best you can conceive of). Something new might
present possibility for unbearable suffering, followed by meaningless death - might present threat virtually
unbounded in significance. That new and apparently minor but nonetheless strange and worrisome ache
you noticed this morning, for example, while you were exercising - might just signify the onset of the
cancer that will slowly and painfully kill you. Alternatively, something unexpected might signify
inconceivable opportunity for expansion of general competence and well-being. Your old, boring, but
secure job unexpectedly disappears. A year later, you are doing what you really want to do, and your life is
incomparably better.
An unexpected thing, or situation, appearing in the course of goal-directed behavior, constitutes a
stimulus that is intrinsically problematic: novel occurrences are, simultaneously, cues for punishment
(threats) and cues for satisfaction (promises).81 This paradoxical a priori status is represented schematically
in Figure 5: The Ambivalent Nature of Novelty. Unpredictable things, which have a paradoxical character,
accordingly activate two antithetical emotional systems, whose mutually inhibitory activities provide basic
motivation for abstract cognition, whose cooperative endeavor is critical to the establishment of permanent
memory, and whose physical substrates constitute universal elements of the human nervous system. The
most rapidly activated82 of these two systems governs inhibition of ongoing behavior, cessation of currently
goal-directed activity;83 the second, equally powerful, but somewhat more conservative,84 underlies
exploration, general behavioral activation,85 and forward locomotion.86 Operation of the former appears
associated with anxiety, with fear and apprehension, with negative affect - universal subjective reactions to
the threatening and unexpected.87 Operation of the latter, by contrast, appears associated with hope, with
curiosity and interest, with positive affect - subjective responses to the promising and unexpected.88 The
process of exploring the emergent unknown is therefore guided by the interplay between the emotions of
curiosity/hope/excitement, on the one hand, and anxiety, on the other - or, to describe the phenomena from

another viewpoint - between the different motor systems responsible for approach (forward locomotion)
and inhibition of ongoing behavior.

The "ambivalent unknown" - that is, novelty - comes in two "forms," so to speak (as alluded to earlier).
"Normal" novelty emerges within the "territory" circumscribed by the choice of a particular end-point or
goal (which is to say, after getting to specific point "b" has been deemed the most important possible
activity, at this time and in this place). Something "normally" novel constitutes an occurrence which leaves
the current departure point and goal intact, but that indicates that the means of achieving that goal have to
be modified. Let us say, for example, that you are in your office. You are accustomed to walking down an
unobstructed hallway, to get to the elevator. You are so used to performing this activity, that you can do it
"automatically" - so you often read while walking. One day, while reading, you stumble over a chair
someone left in the middle of the hallway. This is "normal" novelty. You don't have to alter your current
goal, except in a temporary and trivial manner; you are not likely to get too upset by the unexpected
obstacle. Getting to the elevator is still a real possibility, even within the desired time-frame; all you have
to do is walk around the chair (or move it somewhere else, if you are feeling particularly altruistic). Figure
6: Emergence of Normal Novelty in the Course of Goal-Directed Behavior provides an abstracted
representation of this process of trivial adaptation.

"Revolutionary novelty" is, by contrast, something altogether different. Sometimes the sudden
appearance of the unexpected means taking path "b" to grandma's house, instead of path "a." Sometimes
that appearance means emergent doubt about the very existence of grandma. Here is an example: I am
sitting alone in my office, in a high-rise building, alone at night. I suddenly fantasize: "I am going to take
the elevator down three floors and get something to eat" (more accurately, hunger suddenly grips my
imagination, and uses it for its own purposes). This "fantasy" constitutes a spatially and temporally
bounded image of the ideal future - an "actual" possible future, carved out as a discriminable (and thus
usable) object, from the infinite domain of "potential" possible futures. I use this definite image to evaluate
the events and processes that constitute the interpreted present, as it unfolds around me, as I walk towards
the elevator (on my way to the cafeteria). I want to make "reality" match my fantasy - to subdue my
motivation (to please the gods, so to speak). If the unexpected occurs - say, the elevator is not operating -
the mismatch temporarily stops me. I replace my current plan with an alternative behavioral strategy,
designed to obtain the same end. This means that I do not reconfigure the temporally and spatially bounded
"map" that I am using to evaluate my circumstances - that I am using to "regulate" my emotions. All I have
to do is change strategy.
I decide to take the stairs to the cafeteria. If the stairs are blocked by construction, I am in more serious
trouble. My original fantasy - "go down to the cafeteria and eat" - was predicated on an implicit
presumption: I can get downstairs. This presumption, which I wasn't really even aware of (which might be
regarded as axiomatic, for the purposes of the current operation), has been violated. The story "go
downstairs to eat" only retained its function in an environment characterized by valid means of betweenfloor
transportation. The existence of these means constituted a given - I had used the elevator or the stairs
so often that their very presence took on the aspect of a justifiably-ignored constant. Once I had mastered


the stairs, or the elevator - once I had learned their location, position, and mechanisms - I could take them
for granted, and presume their irrelevance. Predictable phenomena (read "thoroughly explored, and
therefore adapted to") do not attract attention - do not require "consciousness." No new behavioral
strategies or frameworks of reference must be generated, in their presence.
Anyway: the elevators are broken; the stairs are blocked. The map I was using to evaluate my
environment has been invalidated: my ends are no longer tenable. In consequence, necessarily, the means
to those ends (my plans to go to the cafeteria) have been rendered utterly irrelevant. I no longer know what
to do. This means, in a non-trivial sense, that I no longer know where I am. I presumed I was in a place I
was familiar with - indeed, many familiar things (the fact of the floor, for example) have not changed.
Nonetheless, something fundamental has been altered - and I don't know how fundamental. I am now in a
place I cannot easily leave. I am faced with a number of new problems, in addition to my unresolved
hunger - at least in potential (will I get home, tonight? Do I have to get someone to "rescue" me? Who
could rescue me? Who do I telephone, to ask for help? What if there was a fire?). My old "plan" - my old
"story" ("I am going downstairs to get something to eat") - has vanished, and I do not know how to
evaluate my current circumstances. My emotions - previously constrained by the existence of a temporarily
valid plan - re-emerge, in a confused jumble. I am anxious ("what will I do? What if there was a fire?"),
frustrated ("I'm certainly not going to get any more work done tonight, under these conditions!") angry
("who could have been stupid enough to block all the exits?"), and curious ("just what the hell is going on
around here, anyway?") Something unknown has occurred, and blown all my plans. An emissary of chaos -
to speak metaphorically - has disrupted my emotional stability. Figure 7: Emergence of "Revolutionary
Novelty" in the Course of Goal-Directed Behavior graphically presents this state of affairs.
Emergence of "Revolutionary Novelty" in the Course of Goal-Directed Behavior





The plans we formulate are mechanisms designed to bring the envisioned perfect future into being. Once
formulated, plans govern our behavior - until we make a mistake. A mistake, which is the appearance of a
thing or situation not envisioned, provides evidence for the incomplete nature of our plans - indicates that
those plans, and the presumptions upon which they are erected, are in error, and must be updated (or,
heaven forbid, abandoned). As long as everything is proceeding according to plan, we remain on familiar
ground - but when we err, we enter unexplored territory.
What is known, and what unknown, is always relative, in a manner of speaking, because what is
unexpected depends entirely upon what we expect (desire) - on what we had previously planned and
presumed. The unexpected constantly occurs because it is impossible, in the absence of omniscience, to
formulate an entirely accurate model of what actually is happening, or of what should happen; because it is
impossible to determine what results ongoing behavior will finally produce. Errors in representation of the
unbearable present and the ideal, desired future are inevitable, in consequence, as are errors in
implementation and representation of the means by which the former can be transformed into the latter.
The infinite human capacity for error means that encounter with the unknown is inevitable, in the course of
human experience; means that the likelihood of such encounter is as certain, regardless of place and time of
individual existence, as death and taxation. The (variable) existence of the unknown, paradoxically enough,
can therefore be regarded as an environmental constant. Adaptation to the "existence" of this domain must
occur, therefore, in every culture, and in every historical period - regardless of the particulars of any given
social or biological circumstance.
Deviations from desired outcome constitute (relatively) novel events, indicative of errors in
presumption, either at the level of analysis of current state, process, or ideal future. Such mismatches -
unpredictable, nonredundant, or novel occurrences - constantly comprise the most intrinsically meaningful,
interesting elements of the human experiential field. This interest and meaning signifies the presence of
new information, and constitutes a prepotent stimulus for human (and animal) action.89 It is where the
unpredictable emerges that the possibility for all new and useful information exists. It is during the process
of exploration of the unpredictable or unexpected that all knowledge and wisdom is generated, all
boundaries of adaptive competence extended, all foreign territory explored, mapped and mastered. The
eternally extant domain of the unknown therefore constitutes the matrix from which all conditional
knowledge emerges. Everything presently known to each, everything rendered predictable, was at one time
unknown to all, and had to be rendered predictable - beneficial at best, irrelevant at worst - as a
consequence of active exploration-driven adaptation. The matrix is of indeterminable breadth: despite our
great storehouse of culture, despite the wisdom bequeathed to us by our ancestors, we are still
fundamentally ignorant, and will remain so, no matter how much we learn. The domain of the unknown
surrounds us, like an ocean surrounds an island. We can increase the area of the island, but we never take
away much from the sea.
2.2.3. Exploration: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
The unfamiliar exists, as an invariant feature of experience, no less than the familiar. We remain ignorant,
and act while surrounded by uncertainty. Just as fundamentally, however, we always know something, no
matter who we are, or when we live. We tend to view the "environment" as something "objective," but one
of its most basic features - familiarity, or lack thereof - is something virtually defined by the subjective.
This environmental subjectivity is non-trivial, as well: it is certainly the case that mere "interpretation" of a
"phenomenon" can determine whether we thrive or sicken, live or die. It appears, indeed, that the
categorization or characterization of the environment as unknown/known (nature/culture, foreign/familiar)
might be regarded as more "fundamental" than any objective characterization - if we make the presumption
that what we have adapted to is, by definition, reality. For it is the case that the human brain - and higher
nervous systems, in general - have specialized for operation in "the domain of order," and "in the domain
of chaos." And it is impossible to understand the fact of this specialization, unless those domains are
regarded as more than mere metaphor.
We normally use our conceptions of cognitive processes to illuminate the working of the brain
(normally use our models of thought to determine "what must be the case" physiologically). However,
49 






neuropsychological investigation has advanced to the point where the reverse procedure is equally useful.
What is known about brain function can be used to illuminate our conceptions of cognition - indeed, of
"reality" itself) - can be used to provide those conceptions with suitable "objective constraints."
Enlightenment thought strove to separate "reason" and "emotion"; empirical investigations into the
structure and function of the brain - given great initial impetus by the consequences of that separation -
have demonstrated instead that the two phenomena are mutually interdependent, and essentially integral.90
We live in a universe characterized by the constant interplay of yang and yin, chaos and order: "emotion"
provides us with an initial guide, when we don't know what we are doing, when reason alone will not
suffice.91 "Cognition," by contrast, allows us to construct and maintain our ordered environments, and keep
chaos - and affect - in check.
The brain may be usefully regarded as composed of three primary units - motor, sensory, and affective -
or as constituting a matched pair of hemispheres, right and left. Each manner of conceptual subdivision has
its theoretical advantages; furthermore, the two are not mutually exclusive. We will attend to the
description of the "units," portrayed schematically in Figure 8: The Motor and Sensory Units of the
Brain, first.
The Motor and Sensory Units of the Brain
Most neocortical (and many subcortical) structures have attained their largest and most complex level of
development in homo sapiens. This is true, in particular, of the motor unit,92 which comprises the anterior
or forward half of the comparatively newer neocortex (and which is composed of the motor, premotor and
prefrontal lobes). This level of heightened development accounts in part for increased human intelligence,
behavioral versatility and breadth of experience, both actual and potential, and underlies our capacity to
formulate plans and intentions, organize them into programs of action, and regulate their execution.93
50 




The sensory unit,94 which comprises the posterior half of the neocortex (and which is composed of the
parietal, occipital, and temporal lobes), is responsible for the construction of the separate worlds of our
sensory systems (primarily sight, hearing and touch) - and for their integration into the unified perceptual
field that constitutes our conscious experience.95 The sensory unit processes the information generated in
the course of the actions planned by the motor unit, and builds the world of the recognizable and familiar
out of that information.
The "limbic unit," finally - phylogenetically ancient, tucked under the folds of the neocortex -
compares 96 the nature of behavioral consequences, as they occur, with a dynamic model, extant in fantasy,
of what was supposed to occur - of what was desired to happen. It is therefore signalling of motivational
significance, or affective importance, that constitutes what is perhaps the major responsibility of the limbic
system - that, and the (integrally related) inculcation and renewal of memory ["integrally related," as it is
significant events that transform knowledge, that are "stored" in memory (more accurately, that alter
memory)]. This process of signalling necessarily involves comparison of the undesirable present, as
currently understood, with the ideal future, as currently imagined. The capacity to generate such a contrast
appears dependent upon operations undertaken deep within the comparatively ancient central portion of the
brain - particularly in the tightly-integrated structures known as the hippocampus97 and amygdala.98 The
nature of this comparative process can perhaps best be understood, in introduction, through consideration
of a phenomenon known as the event-related cortical potential.
The brain constantly produces a shifting pattern of electrical activity in the course of its operations. The
electroencephalogram (the EEG) provides a rough picture of that pattern. The individual undergoing EEG
examination has electrodes placed in an array on his scalp. These electrodes allow the patterns of electrical
activity, generated in the course of neurological activity, to be detected, monitored and, to some degree,
localized. (The brain produces enough electrical activity to be detected through the skull and tissue
surrounding it, although the interference produced by that surrounding tissue makes evaluation of the EEG
difficult). The rather limited capacities of EEG technology have been greatly extended by the analytic
capacities of the computer. The cortical event-related potential is a measure of brain activity derived by
computer from EEG recordings averaged at different delays after the subject being evaluated has been
presented with some sort of "stimulus." The nature of this stimulus may vary. In the simplest case, it is
merely something sensory, like a tone presented repeatedly through stereo headphones. In more complex
cases the event-related potential is monitored following presentation of a stimulus with affective valence -
which means following something that must be "discriminated, recognized, or otherwise evaluated."99
Perhaps the simplest way to produce an event of this sort is to randomly and rarely insert a tone that differs
in frequency into a repetitious sequence of otherwise predictable tones (although the stimulus might just as
easily be visual or tactile). These "odd-ball" events are characterized by (relative) novelty (novelty is
always relative) and evoke a pattern of cortical electrical activity that differs from that produced by the
predictable tones. Any event that has specific or known implications for alteration in ongoing behavior will
also produce a potential like the "odd-ball."
The averaged cortical event-related potential produced by infrequent or otherwise meaningful events is a
waveform with a characteristic time-course and shape. Most attention has been paid to elements of this
waveform that occur within the first half-second (500 milliseconds) post-stimulus occurrence. As the first
half-second passes, the polarity of the waveform shifts. Peaks and valleys occur at different, more-or-less
standard times (and in essentially predictable "locations") and have therefore been identified and named.
Event-related potentials (ERPs) are negative (N) or positive (P) depending on polarity, and numbered
according to their occurrence in time. The earliest aspects of the ERP (<200 msec) vary with change in the
purely sensory quality of an event. The waveforms named N200 (negative 200 msec) and P300 (positive
300 msec), by contrast, vary with the affective significance and magnitude of the stimulus, and can even be
evoked by the absence of an event that was expected, but that did not appear. The psychophysiologist Eric
Halgren states:
"One may summarize the cognitive conditions that evoke the N2/P3 as being the presentation of stimuli
that are novel or that are signals for behavioral tasks, and thus need to be attended to, and processed.
These evoking conditions and functional consequences are identical to those that have been found for
the orienting reflex."00
51 












Halgren considers the N2/P3 and the autonomic orienting reflex "different parts of an overall organismic
reaction complex evoked by stimuli that merit further evaluation,"01 and terms this overall response pattern
the orienting complex. A substantial body of evidence suggests that the amygdalic and hippocampal
systems are critically involved in production of the N2/P3 waveforms, although other brain systems also
participate. (It is also of great interest to note that an additional waveform, the N4, is produced when human
experimental subjects are exposed to abstracted symbols with integral significance, such as written, spoken
or signed words and faces, in a meaningful context.102 In such a context, the N4 occurs after the N2 but
before the P3, and increases in magnitude as a function of the difficulty of integrating the word with the
context in which it appears. The amygdala and hippocampus are also directly responsible for the production
of this waveform - and, therefore, for contextual synthesis, which is a vital aspect of the derivation of
meaning, which is significance for behavior, given the desire to attain a particular goal.)
The processes that reveal themselves behaviorally in the orienting complex and electrophysiologically in
the N2/N4/P3 waveform appear to play a central part in the manifold processes we experience (and
understand) as consciousness. Another psychophysiologist, Arne Ohman,103 has posited that orienting
initiates a sequence of "controlled processing," which is difficult, slow, accompanied by awareness,
sequential and generative (and which is referred to as exploratory behavior in this document), contrasted
with "automatic processing," which is habitual, "unconscious" and immediate (and which occurs in
"explored territory"). The orienting complex is apparently only manifested when a given experimental
subject becomes "aware" of some relationship between sensory input and motor action. Likewise, the
N2/P3 waveform appears only when the experimental stimulus utilized "has captured the subject's attention
and reached his or her awareness."04 Consciousness (affiliated tightly with orienting, for the purposes of
the present argument) therefore appears as a phenomenon critically involved in and vital to the evaluation
of novelty - appears vital to placement of the unpredictable into a defined and determinate context, as a
consequence of behavioral modification, undertaken in the territory of the unknown. This means that
consciousness plays a centrally important role in the generation of the predictable and comprehended
world from the domain of the unexpected. Such response, placement and generation remains forever
mediated by the twin forces of hope/curiosity and anxiety - forces produced, non-coincidentally, by the
same structures that govern "reflexive" orientation and exploratory motor output.
The constant and universal presence of the incomprehensible in the "world" has "forced" adaptive
response from us - has elicited such response from all creatures like us, with highly developed nervous
systems. We have evolved to operate successfully in a world eternally composed of the predictable, in
paradoxical juxtaposition with the unpredictable. The combination of what we have explored and what we
have still to evaluate actually comprises our environment, insofar as its nature can be broadly specified -
and it is to that environment that our physiological structure has become matched. One set of the systems
that comprise our brain and mind governs activity, when we are guided by our plans - when we are in the
domain of the known. Another appears to operate when we face something unexpected - when we have
entered the realm of the unknown.
105
The "limbic unit" generates the orienting reflex, among its other tasks. It is the orienting reflex, which
manifests itself in emotion, thought and behavior, that is at the core of the fundamental human response to
the novel or unknown. This reflex takes a biologically-determined course, ancient in nature, primordial as
hunger or thirst, basic as sexuality, extant similarly in the animal kingdom, far down the chain of organic
being. The orienting reflex is the general instinctual reaction to the strange category of all occurrences
which have not yet been categorized - is response to the unexpected, novel or unknown per se, and not to
any discriminated aspect of experience, any specifically definable situation or thing. The orienting reflex is
at the core of the process that generates (conditional) knowledge of sensory phenomena and motivational
relevance or valence. Such knowledge is most fundamentally how to behave, and what to expect as a
consequence, in a particular situation, defined by culturally-modified external environmental circumstance
and equally-modified internal motivational state. It is also information about what is, from the objective
perspective - is the record of that sensory experience occurring in the course of ongoing behavior.
The orienting reflex substitutes for particular learned responses when the incomprehensible suddenly
makes its appearance. The occurrence of the unpredictable, the unknown, the source of fear and hope,
creates a seizure of ongoing specifically goal-directed behavior. Emergence of the unexpected constitutes
evidence for the incomplete nature of the story currently guiding such behavior - comprises evidence for
52 














error at the level of working description of current state, representation of desired future state, or
conception of the means to transform the former into the latter. Appearance of the unknown motivates
curious, hopeful exploratory behavior, regulated by fear, as means to update the memory-predicated
working model of reality (to update the known, so to speak, which is defined or familiar territory). The
simultaneous production of two antithetical emotional states, such as those of hope and fear, means conflict
- and the unexpected produces intrapsychic conflict like nothing else. The magnitude and potential
intensity of this conflict cannot be appreciated under normal circumstances, because under normal
circumstances - in defined territory - things are going according to plan. It is only when our goals have
been destroyed that the true significance of the decontextualized object or experience is revealed - and such
revelation makes itself known first in the form of fear.106 We are protected from such conflict - from
subjugation to instinctive terror - by the historical compilation of adaptive information generated in the
course of previous novelty-driven exploration. We are protected from unpredictability by our culturallydetermined
beliefs, by the stories we share with those who are like us. These stories tell us how to presume
and how to act, to maintain the determinate, shared and restricted values that compose our familiar worlds.
The orienting reflex - the involuntary gravitation of attention to novelty - lays the groundwork for the
emergence of (voluntarily-controlled) exploratory behavior.107 Exploratory behavior allows for
classification of the general and (a priori) motivationally-significant unexpected into specified and
determinate domains of motivational relevance. In the case of something with actual (post-investigation)
significance, relevance means context-specific punishment or satisfaction, or their putatively "secondorder"
equivalents: threat or promise (as something threatening implies punishment, as something
promising implies satisfaction). This is categorization, it should be noted, in accordance with implication
for motor output, or behavior, rather than with regards to sensory (or, formalized, objective) property.108
We have generally presumed that the purpose of exploration is production of a picture of the objective
qualities of the territory explored. This is evidently - but only partially - true. However, the reasons we
produce such pictures (are motivated to produce such pictures) are not usually given sufficient
consideration. Every explorable sub-territory, so to speak, has its sensory aspect, but it is the emotional or
motivational relevance of the new domain that is truly important. We only need to know that something is
hard and glowing red as a means of keeping track of the fact that it is hot, and therefore dangerous - that it
is punishing, if contacted. We need to know the feel and look of objects so that we can keep track of what
can be eaten, and what might eat us.
When we explore a new domain, we are mapping the motivational or affective significance of the things
or situations that are characteristic of our goal-directed interactions within that domain, and we use the
sensory information we encounter, to identify what is important. It is the determination of specific meaning,
or emotional significance, in previously unexplored territory - not identification of the objective features -
that allows us to inhibit the novelty-induced terror and curiosity emergence of that territory otherwise
automatically elicits. We feel comfortable somewhere new, once we have discovered that nothing exists
there that will threaten or hurt us (more particularly, when we have adjusted our behavior and schemas of
representation so that nothing there is likely to or able to threaten or hurt us). The consequence of
exploration that allows for emotional regulation (that generates security, essentially) is not objective
description - as the scientist might have it - but categorization of the implications of an unexpected
occurrence for specification of means and ends. Such categorization is what an object "is," from the
perspective of archaic affect and subjective experience. It is of course also the case that the orienting reflex,
and the exploratory behavior that follows its manifestation, allows for the differentiation of the unknown
into the familiar categories of objective reality. However, this ability is a late development, historically
speaking - emerging only four hundred years ago109 - and cannot therefore be considered basic to
"thinking" or "evaluation." Specification of the collectively apprehensible sensory qualities of something -
generally considered, in the modern world, as the essential aspect of the description of reality - merely
serves, to state it once again, as an aid to the more fundamental process of evaluation; merely serves to
determine the precise nature of relevant or potentially relevant phenomena.
When things are going according to plan - that is, when our actions fulfill our desires - we feel secure,
even happy. When nothing is going wrong, the cortical systems expressly responsible for the organization
and implementation of goal-directed behavior remain firmly in control. When cortically-generated plans
and fantasies go up in smoke, however, this control vanishes. The comparatively ancient "limbic"
53 









hippocampal and amygdalic systems leap into action, modifying affect, interpretation, and behavior. The
hippocampus appears particularly specialized for comparing the (interpreted) reality of the present, as it
manifests itself in the subjective sphere, with the fantasies of the ideal future constructed by the pre-motor
unit (acting in turn as the higher-order mediator - the king, so to speak - of all the specialized subsystems
that compose the more fundamental or primary components of the brain). These desire-driven fantasies
might be regarded as motivated hypotheses about the relatively likelihood of events produced in the course
of ongoing goal-directed activity. What you expect to happen - really, what you want to happen, at least in
most situations - is a model you generate, using what you already know, in combination with what you are
learning while you act. The hippocampal comparator110 constantly and "unconsciously" checks what is
"actually" happening against what is supposed to happen. This means, that the comparator contrasts the
"unbearable present," insofar as it is comprehended (because it is a model, too), against the ideal future, as
it is imagined; means that it compares the interpreted outcome of active behavior with an image, in
imagination, of the intended consequences of that behavior. Past experience - skill and representation of
the outcome of skill; memory, as it is applied - governs behavior, until error is committed. When
something occurs that is not intended - when the actual outcome, as interpreted, does not match the desired
outcome, as posited - the hippocampus shifts mode, and prepares to update cortical memory storage.
Behavioral control shifts from the cortex, to the limbic system - apparently, to the amygdala, which
governs the provisional determination of the affective significance of unpredictable events, and has
powerful output to centers of motor control.111 This shift of control allows the activation of structures
governing orienting, heightened intensity of sensory processing, and exploration.
The "higher" cortex controls behavior until the unknown emerges - until it makes a mistake in
judgment; until memory no longer serves - until the activity it governs produces a mismatch between what
is desired, and what actually occurs. When such a mismatch occurs, appropriate affect (fear and curiosity)
emerges. But how can situation-relevant emotion attach itself to what has by definition not yet been
encountered? Traditionally, significance is attached to previously irrelevant things or situations as a
consequence of learning - which is to say that things mean nothing until their meaning is learned. But no
learning has yet taken place, in the face of the unknown - and yet, emotion reveals itself, in the presence of
error. It appears, therefore, that the kind of emotion that the unpredictable arouses is not learned - which is
to say that the novel or unexpected comes preloaded with affect. Things are not irrelevant, as a matter of
course. They are rendered irrelevant, as a consequence of (successful) exploratory behavior. When they are
first encountered, however, they are meaningful. It is the amygdala, at bottom, that appears responsible for
the (disinhibited) generation of this a priori meaning - terror and curiosity.
The amygdala appears to automatically respond to all things or situations, unless told not to. It is told
not to - is functionally inhibited - when ongoing goal-directed behaviors produce the desired (intended)
results.112 When an error occurs, however - indicating that current memory-guided motivated plans and
goals are insufficient - the amygdala is released from inhibition, and labels the unpredictable occurrence
with meaning. Anything unknown is dangerous and promising, simultaneously: evokes anxiety, curiosity,
excitement and hope automatically and prior to what we would normally regard as exploration or as (more
context-specific) classification. The operations of the amygdala are responsible for ensuring that the
unknown is regarded with respect, as the default decision. The amygdala says, in effect - "if you don't
know what it signifies, you bloody well better pay attention to it." Attention constitutes the initial stage of
exploratory behavior, motivated by amygdalic operation - composed of the interplay between anxiety,113
which impels caution in the face of novelty-threat, and hope, which compels approach to noveltypromise.114
Caution-regulated approach allows for the update of memory, in the form of skill and
representation. Exploration-updated memory inhibits the production of a priori affect. On familiar ground -
in explored territory - we feel no fear (and comparatively little curiosity).
The desired output of behavior (what should be) is initially posited; if the current strategy fails, the
approach and exploration system is activated,115 although it remains under the governance of anxiety. The
approach system (and its equivalent, in abstraction) generates (1) alternative sequences of behavior, whose
goal is the production of a solution to the present dilemma; (2) alternative conceptualizations of the desired
goal; or (3) re-evaluation of the motivational significance of current state. This means (1) that a new
strategy for attaining the desired goal might be invented, or (2) that a replacement goal, serving the same
function, might be chosen; or (3) that the behavioral strategy might be abandoned, due to the cost of its
54 


implementation. In the latter case, the whole notion of what constitutes "reality" - at least with regards to
the story or frame of reference currently in use - might have to be reconstructed. This most troublesome
state of affairs is schematically presented - in its successful form - in Figure 9: The Regeneration of
Stability from the Domain of Chaos. 116

Figure 9: The Regeneration of Stability from the Domain of Chaos
Exploratory activity culminates "normally" in restriction, expansion, or transformation of the behavioral
repertoire. In exceptional, non-normal circumstances - that is, when a "major error" has been committed -
such activity culminates in "revolution": in modification of the entire story guiding affective evaluation and
behavioral programming. Such revolutionary modification means update of modeled reality, past, present
and future, through incorporation of information generated during exploratory behavior. Successful
exploration transforms the unknown into the expected, desired and predictable; establishes appropriate
behavioral measures (and expectations of those measures) for next contact. Unsuccessful exploration, by
contrast - avoidance or escape - leaves the novel object firmly entrenched in its initial, "natural," anxietyprovoking
category. This observation sets the stage for a fundamental realization: human beings do not
learn to fear new objects or situations, or even really "learn" to fear something that previously appeared
safe, when it manifests a dangerous property. Fear is the a priori position, the natural response to
everything for which no structure of behavioral adaptation has been designed and inculcated. Fear is the
innate reaction to everything that has not been rendered predictable, as a consequence of successful,
creative exploratory behavior undertaken in its presence, at some time in the past. LeDoux states:
"It is well established that emotionally neutral stimuli can acquire the capacity to evoke striking
emotional reaction following temporal pairing with an aversive event. Conditioning does not create new
emotional responses but instead simply allows new stimuli to serve as triggers capable of activating
55 







existing, often hard-wired, species-specific emotional reactions. In the rat, for example, a pure tone
previously paired with footshock evokes a conditioned fear reaction consisting of freezing behavior
accompanied by a host of autonomic adjustments, including increases in arterial pressure and heart
rate.117 Similar responses are expressed when laboratory rats are exposed to a cat for the first time, but
following amygdala lesions such responses are no longer present,118 suggesting that the responses are
genetically specified (since they appear when the rat sees a cat, a natural predator, for the first time) and
involve the amygdala. The fact that electrical stimulation of the amygdala is capable of eliciting the
similar response patterns119 further supports the notion that the responses are hard-wired."0
Fear is not conditioned; security is unlearned, in the presence of particular things ("stimuli") or contexts,
as a consequence of violation of explicit or implicit presupposition. Classical behavioral psychology is
wrong - in the same manner our folk presumptions are wrong: fear is not secondary, not learned - security
is secondary, learned. Everything not explored is tainted, a priori, with apprehension. Any thing or
situation that undermines the foundations of the familiar and secure is therefore to be feared.121
It is difficult for us to formulate a clear picture of the subjective effects of the systems that dominate our
initial response to the truly unpredictable, because we strive with all our might to ensure that everything
around us remains normal. Under "normal" conditions, therefore, these primordial systems never operate,
with their full force. It might be said, with a certain amount of justification, that we devote our entire lives
to making sure that we never have to face anything unknown, in the revolutionary sense - at least not
accidentally. Our success in doing so deludes us, so to speak, about the true nature, power, and intensity of
our potential emotional responses. As civilized people, we are secure. We can predict the behaviors of
others, around us (that is, if they share our stories); furthermore, we can control our environments well
enough to ensure that our subjection to threat and punishment remains at a minimum. It is the cumulative
consequences of our adaptive struggle - our cultures - which enable this prediction and control. The
existence of our cultures, however, blinds us to the nature of our true (emotional) natures - at least to the
range of that nature, and to the consequences of its emergence.
Experimental examinations of the orienting reflex have not shed much light on our true potential for
emotional response, in the past, because they generally took place under exceptionally controlled
circumstances. Subjects evaluated for their responses to "novelty" are generally presented with stimuli that
are only novel in the most trivial - the most "normal" - of manners. A tone, for example, which differs
unpredictably from another tone ( or which appears at a relatively unpredictable time) is still a tone,
something experienced, more-or-less, a thousand times before, and something experienced in a lab, in a
hospital or university, under the jurisdiction of trustworthy personnel, devoted to minimizing the anxietyprovoking
nature of the experimental procedure. The controlled circumstances of the experiment (which
are, in fact, the implicit and therefore invisible theoretical presumptions of the experiment) have led us to
minimize the importance of the orienting reflex, and to misunderstand the nature of its disappearance.
Orienting signifies "attention," not terror, in the standard lab situation, and its gradual elimination with
repeated stimulus presentation is regarded as "habituation" - as something boring, akin to automatic
acclimation, adjustment, or desensitization. "Habituation" is not a passive process, however - at least at
higher cortical levels of processing. It just looks passive, when observed under relatively trivial
circumstances. It is in reality always the consequence of active exploration and subsequent modification of
behavior, or interpretive schema. The (relatively) novel target laboratory tone, for example, is investigated
for its underlying structure by the cortical systems involved in audition. These systems actively analyze the
component elements of every sound.122 The subject is lead to "expect" or predict one sort of sound, and
gets another. The unexpected other has indeterminate significance, in that particular context, and is
therefore regarded as (comparatively) meaningful - threatening and promising. The unexpected tone is
presented repeatedly. The exploratory subject notes that the repetitions signify nothing, in the context that
defines the experimental situation (nothing punishing, satisfying, threatening or promising), and ceases to
react. He has not merely "habituated" to the stimuli. He has mapped its context-dependent significance,
which is zero. This process appears trivial because the experimental situation makes it so. In real life, it is
anything but boring.
Classical work conducted on animal "emotion" and motivation has taken place under circumstances
reminiscent of the artificially constrained situations that define most work on human orienting. Animals,
56 



usually rats, are trained to be "afraid" - or to inhibit their behavior - in the presence of a "neutral stimulus"
paired repeatedly with a punishment [a stimulus whose motivational valence is negative, in the supposed
absence of learning (or, at least, in the absence of interpretation)]. The rat is placed in the experimental
"environment," and is allowed to familiarize himself with his surroundings. The "neutral stimulus" he is
faced with might be a light; the "unconditioned" stimulus, an electric shock. The light goes on; the floor of
the rat's cage is briefly electrified. This sequence occurs repeatedly. Soon the rat "freezes" as soon as the
light appears. He has developed a "conditioned response," manifesting behavioral inhibition (and fear,
theoretically) to something that was previously neutral. Procedures of this sort effectively produce fear.
Their implicit contextual constraints or axioms of these procedures, however, lead researchers to draw odd
conclusions about the nature of the "acquisition" of fear.
Such experiments first imply that fear in a given situation is necessarily something learned. Second, they
imply that fear exists, as a consequence of exposure to punishment, and only because of that exposure. The
problem with this interpretation is that the rat was inevitably "afraid" as soon as he was placed in the new
experimental environment - even though nothing terrible had yet happened there. After he is allowed to
explore, he "calms down." It is only then that he is regarded as "normal." The experimenter then jars the rat
out of his "acquired normalcy" by presenting him with something unexpected, and painful - the
"unconditioned stimulus," in conjunction with the "neutral stimulus." He then "learns" to be afraid. Really
what has happened is that the unexpected occurrence forces the rat to re-attain the state he was in (or that
same state, in an exaggerated manner) when he first entered the cage. The fact of the electric shock, in
conjunction with the light, indicates to the rat (reminds the rat) that he is, once again, in unexplored
territory. His fear, in unexplored territory, is just as "normal" as his complacency in environments he has
mapped, and which hold no danger. We regard the calm rat as the "real" rat because we project our
misinterpretations of our own "habitual" nature, onto our experimental animals. It is as D.O. Hebb states:
"[The urbanity characterizing ourselves,]... the civilized, amiable, and admirable part of mankind, well
brought up and not constantly in a state of fear... depends as much on our successfully avoiding
disturbing stimulation as on a lowered sensitivity [to fear-producing stimuli].... [T]he capacity for
emotional breakdown may [well] be self-concealing, leading [animals and human beings] to find or
create an environment in which the stimuli to excessive emotional response are at a minimum. So
effective is our society in this regard that its members - especially the well-to-do and educated ones -
may not even guess at some of their own potentialities. One usually thinks of education, in the broad
sense, as producing a resourceful, emotionally stable adult, without respect to the environment in which
these traits are to appear. To some extent this may be true. But education can be seen as being also the
means of establishing a protective social environment in which emotional stability is possible. Perhaps it
strengthens the individual against unreasonable fears and rages, but it certainly produces a uniformity of
appearance and behavior which reduces the frequency with which the individual member of the society
encounters the causes of such emotion. On this view, the susceptibility to emotional disturbance may not
be decreased. It may in fact be increased. The protective cocoon of uniformity, in personal appearance,
manners, and social activity generally, will make small deviations from custom appear increasingly
strange and thus (if the general thesis is sound) increasingly intolerable. The inevitable small deviations
from custom will bulk increasingly large, and the members of the society, finding themselves tolerating
trivial deviations well, will continue to think of themselves as socially adaptable."
Our emotional regulation depends as much (or more) on the stability and predictability of the social
environment (on the maintenance of our cultures) as on "interior" processes, classically related to the
strength of the ego or the personality. Social order is a necessary precondition for psychological stability: it
is our companions, and their actions (or inactions) that primarily stabilize - or destabilize - our emotions.
A rat (a person) is a complacent creature, when it is in explored territory. When it is in unexplored
territory, however, it is anything but calm. A rat moved from its home cage to a new and unknown
environment - a new cage, for example - will first freeze (even though it has never been punished, in the
new situation). If nothing terrible happens to it (nothing punishing, threatening, or additionally
unpredictable) it will begin to sniff, to look around, to move its head, to gather new information about the
intrinsically frightening place it now inhabits. Gradually, it starts to move about. It will explore the whole
57 











cage, with increasing confidence. It is mapping the new environment for affective valence. It "wants" to
find out - is there anything here that will kill me? Anything here I can eat? Anyone else here - someone
hostile, or friendly; a potential mate? The rat is interested in determining whether the new place contains
anything of determinate interest to a rat, and it explores, to the best of its capacity, to make that judgment.
It is not primarily interested in the "objective" nature of the new circumstances - a rat cannot actually
determine what is objective, and what is merely "personal opinion." Nor does it care. It just wants to know
what it should do.
What happens if an animal encounters something truly unexpected - something that should just not be,
according to its current "frame of reference" or "system of belief"? The answer to this question sheds
substantial light on the nature of the orienting reflex, in its full manifestation. Modern experimental
psychologists have begun to examine the response of animals to natural sources of mystery, and threat.
They allow the animals to set up their own environments, realistic environments, and then expose them to
the kinds of surprising circumstances they might encounter, in "real life." The appearance of a predator, in
previously "safe" space (space previously explored, that is, and mapped as useful or irrelevant) constitutes
one type of realistic surprise. Blanchard and colleagues describe the naturalistic behavior of rats, under
such conditions:
"When a cat is presented to established mixed-sex groups of laboratory rats living in a visible burrow
system, the behaviors of the subjects change dramatically, in many cases for 24 hours or more.124 The
initial active defensive behavior, flight to the tunnel/chamber system, is followed by a period of
immobility during which the rats make 22 kHz ultrasonic vocalizations, which apparently serve as alarm
cries, at a high rate.125 As freezing breaks up, proxemic avoidance of the open area gradually gives way
to a pattern of "risk assessment" of the area where the cat was encountered. Subjects poke their heads
out of the tunnel openings to scan the open area where the cat was presented, for minutes or hours
before emerging, and when they do emerge, their locomotory patterns are characterized by [behaviors
that theoretically reduce their visibility and vulnerability to predators] and very short "corner runs" into
and out of the open area. These risk assessment activities appear to involve active gathering of
information about the possible danger source,126 providing a basis for a gradual return to nondefensive
behaviors.127 Active risk assessment is not seen during early post-cat exposure, when freezing and
avoidance of the open area are the dominant behaviors, but rises to a peak about 7-10 hours later, and
then gradually declines. Nondefensive behaviors such as eating, drinking and sexual and aggressive
activity tend to be reduced over the same period.128"
129
The unexpected appearance of a predator, where nothing but defined territory previously existed,
terrifies the rats - badly enough so that they "scream" about it, persistently, for a long period of time. Once
this initial terror abates - which only occurs if nothing else horrible or punishing happens - curiosity is
disinhibited, and the rats return to the scene of the crime. The space "renovelized" by the fact of the cat has
to be transformed once again into explored territory - as a consequence of active modification of behavior
(and representational schema), not by passive desensitization to the unexpected. The rats run across the
territory "contaminated" by the presence of the cat, to find out if anything dangerous (to running rats) still
lurks there. If the answer is "no," then the space is defined, once again, as home territory (which is that
place where commonplace behaviors produce desired ends). The rats transform the dangerous unknown
into familiar territory, as a consequence of voluntary exploration. In the absence of such exploration, terror
reigns unchecked.
It is just as illuminating to consider the responses of rats to their kin - who constitute "explored
territory" - in contrast to their attitude towards "strangers," whose behavior is not predictable. Rats are
highly social animals, perfectly capable of living with their familiar compatriots in peace. They do not like
members of other kin groups, however; will hunt them down and kill them. Accidental or purposeful
intruders are dealt with in the same manner. Rats identify one another by smell. If an experimenter removes
a well-loved rat from its familial surroundings, scrubs it down, provides it with a new odor, and returns it to
its peers - it will be promptly dispatched, by those who once loved it. The "new" rat constitutes
"unexplored territory;" his presence is regarded as a threat (not unreasonably) to everything currently
secure. 130 Chimpanzees - perfectly capable of killing "foreign devils" (even those who were once familiar)
- act in much the same manner.131
58 









2.2.4. Explored Territory: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
When we explore, we transform the indeterminate status and meaning of the unknown thing that we are
exploring into something determinate - in the worst case, rendering it non-threatening, non-punishing; in
the best, manipulating and/or categorizing it so that it is useful. Animals perform this transformation in the
course of actual action, which is to say that they construct their worlds by shifting their positions and
changing their actions in the face of the unknown, and by mapping the consequences of those shifts and
changes in terms of their affective or motivational valence. When an animal encounters an unexpected
situation, such as a new object placed in its cage, it first freezes, watching the object. If nothing terrible
happens, while it is immobile - nothing punishing, or additionally threatening - it moves, slowly and at a
distance, monitoring the thing for its reactions to these cautious exploratory activities. Perhaps the animal
sniffs at the thing, or scratches at it - trying to determine what it might be good (or bad) for. It maps the
utility and valence of the object, conceived in relationship to its ongoing activity (and, perhaps, to possible
patterns of activity in the future). The animal builds its world of significances from the information
generated in the course of - as a consequence of - ongoing exploratory behavior. The application of
experimental search programs, drawn primarily from the reservoir of learned (imitated) and instinctual
behavior, or manifested as trial and error, involves behavioral alteration (exploration, play) and subsequent
transformation of sensory and affective input. When an animal actively explores something new, it changes
the sensory quality and motivational significance of that aspect of its experience, as a consequence of its
exploratory strategy. This means that the animal exhibits a variety of behaviors in a given mysterious
situation and monitors the results. It is the organized interpretation of these results, and the behaviors that
produce them, that constitute the world, past, present and future, of the animal (in conjunction with the
unknown, of course - which constantly supersedes the capacity for representation).
It is not too much to say that the animal elicits the properties of the object, sensory and affective, (or
even brings them into being) through its capacity for creative investigation. 132 Animals that are relatively
simple - compared, say, to higher-order primates, including man - are limited in the behaviors they
manifest by the structure of their physiology. A rat cannot pick anything up, for example, to examine it in
detail - and does not in addition have the visual capacity to focus intensely on the kinds of tiny features we
can perceive. Higher-order nonhuman primates have a more developed grip, however, which enables more
detailed exploration, and, in addition, have a relatively sophisticated prefrontal cortex. This means that such
primates can evoke more features from the world, directly, and that they are increasingly capable of
modelling and acting. The prefrontal cortex is the newest part of the motor unit, and "grew" out of the
direct motor control centers, in the course of cortical evolution.133 More sophistication in development of
the prefrontal centers means - in part - heightened capability for abstract exploration, which means
investigation in the absence of actual movement, which means the capacity to learn from the observation of
others and through consideration of potential actions before they emerge in behavior. This means
increasing capability for thought - considered as abstracted action and representation.134 Action and
thought produce phenomena. Novel acts and thoughts produce new phenomena. Creative exploration,
concrete and abstract, is therefore linked in a direct sense to being. Increased capacity for exploration
means existence in a qualitatively different - even new - world. This entire argument implies, of course,
that more complex and behaviorally flexible animals inhabit ("construct," if you will135) a more complex
universe.
Humans possess cortical development - prefrontal and otherwise - that is unique in terms of its great
mass and, more importantly, in terms of its structure. Various indices of development have been used to
signify the nature of the relationship between the brain and intelligence. Sheer mass is one measure, degree
of surface convolution another. The former measure is contaminated by size of animal. Larger animals tend
to have more absolutely massive brains. This does not necessarily make them smarter. Brain mass corrected
for body size constitutes the encephalization quotient, a common rough measure of animal intelligence.136
Degree of surface convolution constitutes an additionally useful measure. The grey matter of the brain -
which theoretically does much of the work associated with intelligence - occupies the brain's surface,
which has been dramatically increased in area by folding. Some representatives of the cetacean family
(dolphins and whales) have encephalization quotients similar to and brain surfaces more convoluted than
59 



man's137 - although the thickness of the cetacean neocortex is about half that of the human.138
Consideration of this high level of nervous development has led to speculation about the potential
superhuman range of cetacean ability.139 However, it is structure and organization of cortex, not simply
mass, or even relative mass, or even surface area, that most clearly defines the nature and reach of a
species' experience and competence. More particularly, it is embodiment of the brain that matters. Brain
structure necessarily reflects embodiment - despite the archaic presumption of the independence of spirit
and matter (or soul and body, or mind and body) - because the body is, in a primary sense, the environment
to which the brain has adapted.
Figure 10: The Motor Homunculus
The body is specifically represented in the neocortex. This representation is often given schematic form
as the homunculus, or "little man." The homunculus was "discovered" by Wilder Penfield,140 who mapped
the surface of the cortices of his neurosurgical patients, by stimulating them electrically, painstakingly,
point after point. He did this to find out what different sections of the brain were doing, so that he could do
the least damage possible, when attempting to surgically treat epilepsy or cancer or other forms of brain
abnormality. He would probe the surface of the brain of one of his (awake) patients with an electrode
(patients undergoing neurosurgery are frequently awake, as the brain feels no pain) and monitor the results,
either directly, or by asking the patient what he or she experienced. Sometimes such stimulation would
produce visions, sometimes elicit memories - other times, produce movement or sensations. Penfield
determined, in this manner, how the body was mapped onto the central nervous system - how it was
incarnated, so to speak, in intrapsychic representation. He established, for example, that homunculi come in
60 









two forms, motor and sensory - the former associated with the primary zone of the motor unit; the latter
associated with the primary zone of the sensory area of the sensory unit. It is the motor form - represented
schematically in Figure 10: The Motor Homunculus - which is of most interest to us, because our
discussion centers on motor output. The motor homunculus is a very odd little "creature." Its face
(particularly mouth and tongue) and hands (particularly thumbs) are grossly disproportionate to the rest of
its "body." This is because comparatively large areas of the motor (and sensory, for that matter) cortex are
given over to control of the face and hands, which are capable of an immense number of complex and
sophisticated operations. The motor homunculus is an interesting figure. It might be regarded as the body,
insofar as the body has anything to do with the brain. It is useful to consider the structure of the
homunculus, because it is in some profound way representative of our essential nature, as it finds
expression in emotion and behavior.
It is the most outstanding characteristic of the motor homunculus, for example - the hand, with its
opposable thumb - that is simultaneously the defining feature of the human being. The ability to
manipulate and explore characteristics of objects, large and small - restricted as a general capacity to the
highest of primates - sets the stage for elicitation of an increased range of their properties, for their
utilization as tools (for more comprehensive transformation of their infinite potential into definable
actuality). The hand, used additionally to duplicate the action and function of objects, also allows first for
imitation (and pointing), and then for full-blown linguistic representation.141 Used for written language, the
hand additionally enables long-distance (temporal and spatial) transfer of its ability to another (and for the
elaboration and extension of exploration, during the process of writing, which is hand-mediated thinking).
Even development of spoken language, the ultimate analytic motor skill, might reasonably be considered an
abstract extension of the human ability to take things apart, and then to reassemble them, in an original
manner. Interplay between hand and brain has literally enabled the individual to change the structure of the
world. Consideration of the structure and function of the brain must take this primary fact into account. A
dolphin or whale has a large, complex brain - a highly developed nervous system - but it cannot shape its
world. It is trapped, so to speak, in its streamlined test-tube like form, specialized for oceanic life. It cannot
directly alter the shape of its material environment in any complex manner. Its brain, therefore, is not likely
prepared to perform any traditionally "creative" function (indeed - as one would suspect - lacks the
sophisticated structuring characteristic of primate brains142).
It is not just the hand, however, that makes the crucial human difference, although it is the most obvious,
and perhaps the most important, single factor. It is more a style or melody of adaptation that characterizes
the individual human being. This style is adaptation for exploration of the unknown, within a social context
- for the (speech-mediated) creation, elaboration, remembrance, description and subsequent
communication of new behavioral patterns, and for the representation of the (frequently novel)
consequences of those patterns. The hand itself was rendered more useful by the development of vertical
stance, which extended visual range, and freed the upper body from the demands of locomotion. The fine
musculature of the face, lips, and tongue - over-represented, once again, in the motor homunculus - helped
render subtle communication possible. Development of explicit language extended the power of such
communication immensely. Increasingly detailed exchange of information enabled the resources of all to
become the resources of each, and vice versa. That process of feedback greatly extended the reach and
utility of the hand - in fact provided every hand with the ability, at least in potential, of every other hand,
extant currently or previously. Evolution of the restricted central field of the eye, which has input expanded
10,000 times in the primary visual area, and is additionally represented, interhemispherically, at several
higher-order cortical sites,143 was of vital importance to development of visual language, and enabled close
observation, made gathering of detailed information simpler. Combination of hand and eye enabled homo
sapiens to manipulate things, to a degree qualitatively different from that of any other animal. The
individual can discover what things are like, under various, voluntarily produced or accidentally
encountered (yet considered) conditions - upside down, flying through the air, hit against other things,
broken into pieces, heated in fire, and so on. The combination of hand and eye allowed human beings to
experience and analyze the (emergent) nature of things. This ability, revolutionary as it was, was
dramatically extended by application of hand-mediated, spoken (and written) language.
The human style of adaptation extends from the evidently physical to the more subtly psychological, as
well. The phenomenon of consciousness, for example - arguably the defining feature of man - appears
61 








related in some unknown fashion to breadth of cellular activation in the neocortex. Bodily features with
large areas of cortical representation are also therefore more thoroughly represented in consciousness (at
least in potential). This can be made immediately evident to subjective awareness merely by contrasting the
capacity for control and monitoring of the hand, for example, with the much-less-represented expanse of
the back. Consciousness also evidently expands or sharpens during the course of activities designed to
enhance or expand adaptive competence - during the course of creative exploration. Processing of novel or
otherwise interesting sensory information, associated with the orienting complex, heightened awareness
and focused concentration, activates large areas of neocortex. Similarly, increased cortical mobilization
takes place during the practice phase of skill acquisition, when awareness appears required for development
of control. The area of such engagement or mobilization shrinks in size as movement becomes habitual and
unconscious, or when sensory information loses interest or novelty.144 Finally - as we have noted before -
intrinsic pleasure of an intense nature appears to accompany activation of the cortical systems activated
during psychomotor exploratory activity, undertaken in the face of the unknown. The operation of these
systems appears mediated in part by the neurotransmitter dopamine145 - involved in producing subjective
and behavioral response to cues of reward, in the form of hope, curiosity and active approach.
Human beings enjoy capacity for investigation, classification and consequent communication, which is
qualitatively different from that characterizing any other animal. The material structure of Homo sapiens is
ideal for exploration, and for the dissemination of the results thereof; spiritually - psychologically - man is
characterized by the innate capacity to take true pleasure in such activity. Our physical attributes - what we
are (the abilities of the hand, in combination with the other physiological specializations of man) - define
who we are, and enable us to endlessly elicit new properties from previously stable and predictable
elements of experience. The object - any object - serves us as a source of limitless possibility (or, at least,
possibility limited only by the capacity for exploratory genius exhibited at any particular moment). Simple
animals perform simple operations, and inhabit a world whose properties are equally constrained (a world
where most "information" remains "latent"). Human beings can manipulate - take apart and put together -
with far more facility than any other creature. Furthermore, our capacity for communication - both verbal
and nonverbal - has meant almost unbelievable facilitation of exploration, and subsequent diversity of
adaptation.
Thinking might in many cases be regarded as the abstracted form of exploration - as the capacity to
investigate, without the necessity of direct motoric action. Abstract analysis (verbal and nonverbal) of the
unexpected or novel plays a much greater role for humans than for animals146 - a role that generally takes
primacy over action. It is only when this system fails partially or completely in humans - or when it plays a
paradoxical role (amplifying the significance or potential danger of the unknown through definitive but
"false" negative labelling) - that active exploration (or active avoidance), with its limitations and dangers,
becomes necessary. Replacement of potentially dangerous exploratory action with increasingly flexible and
abstracted thought means the possibility for growth of knowledge without direct exposure to danger - and
constitutes one major advantage of the development of intelligence. The abstract intelligence characteristic
of the human being developed in parallel with rapid evolution of the brain - rapid shift in quantity and
quality. We can communicate the results and interpretations of our manipulations (and the nature of the
procedures that constitute that manipulation) to each other, across immense spatial and temporal barriers.
This capacity for exploration, verbal elaboration and communication of such in turn dramatically heightens
our capacity for exploration (as we have access to all communicated strategies and interpretive schemas,
accumulated over time, generated in the course of the creative activity of others). In terms of normal
parlance, this would mean merely that we have been able to "discover" more aspects of the world. It seems
to me more accurate, however, to recognize the limitations of this perspective, and to make room for the
realization that new procedures and modes of interpretation literally produce new phenomena. The word
enables differentiated thought, and dramatically heightens the capacity for exploratory maneuvering. The
world of human experience is constantly transformed and renewed as a consequence of such exploration. In
this manner, the word constantly engenders new creation.
The capacity to create novel behaviors and categories of interpretation in response to the emergence of
the unknown might be regarded as the primary hallmark of human consciousness - indeed, of human being.
Our engagement in this process literally allows us to carve the world out of the undifferentiated mass of
unobserved and unencountered "existence" - a form of existence which exists only hypothetically, as a
62 






necessary fiction; a form about which nothing can be experienced, and less accurately stated. We "carve"
out the world as a consequence of our direct interactions with the unknown - most notably, with our hands,
which enable us to manipulate things, to change their sensory aspects and, most importantly, to change
their importance to us, to give them new, more desirable value. The capacity for dextrous manipulation is
particularly human, and has enabled us to radically alter the nature of our experience. Equally particular,
however, is our capacity for abstract exploration, which is thought about action (and its consequences), in
the absence of action (and its consequences). The manner in which we conduct our abstracted exploration
appears as tightly linked to the physiological structures of our brains as the manner in which we move,
while exploring. In novel circumstances, our behavioral output is mediated by the systems that govern fear,
and appropriate inhibition, and hope, and appropriate activation. The same things happen when we think
abstractly - even when we think about how others think.147
Animal exploration is primarily motor in nature. An animal must move around an unfamiliar thing or
situation to come to any understanding of it - to determine its affective relevance and sensory nature. This
process of moving around experimentally appears as a consequence of the interaction between the mutually
regulatory or inhibitory evaluative systems whose responsibilities are identification of potential danger, or
threat, and potential satisfaction, or promise. In the human case, each of these systems apparently comes, in
the course of normal development, to dominate one of our twinned cortical hemispheres: the right governs
response to threat (and to punishment), while the left controls response to promise and, perhaps (although
much less clearly) to satisfaction.148 This basically means that the right hemisphere governs our initial
responses to the unknown, while the left is more suited for actions undertaken while we know what we are
doing. This is in part because everything thoroughly explored has in fact been rendered either promising or
satisfying (or, at least, irrelevant). If threat or punishment still lurks somewhere - that is, somewhere we
must be - our behavioral adaptation is, by definition, insufficient (and the unexpected has not been
vanquished). We have been unable to modify our actions to elicit from the "environment" - really, from the
"unknown" - those consequences we wish to produce.
Richard Davidson and his colleagues have been investigating the relationship between different patterns
of cortical electrical activity and mood states, in adults and children. Davidson et al. have concluded that
the twin hemispheres of the human brain are differentially specialized for affect - at least with regards to
their frontal regions. Signs of positive affect (like genuine smiling in infants) are accompanied by
heightened comparative activation of the left frontal cortex. Negative states of affect (like those occuring in
chronic depression), by contrast, are accompanied by heightened activation of the right frontal
hemisphere.149 Substantial additional evidence exists to support this general claim. To put it most
fundamentally: it appears that the twin hemispheres of the brain are differentially specialized (1) for
operation in unexplored territory, where the nature and valence of things remains indeterminate, and (2) for
operation in explored territory, where things have been rendered either irrelevant or positive, as a
consequence of previous exploration. Our brains contain two emotional systems, so to speak - one
functions when we do not know what to do, and initiates the (exploratory) process that creates secure
territory; the other functions when we are in fact secure. The fact of the presence of these two subsystems,
but not their "locale," has been known for a good while; Maier and Schnierla150 and Schnierla151
hypothesized more than five decades ago that mechanisms of "withdrawal" and "approach" (characteristic
of animals at virtually all levels of the evolutionary scale) provided the foundation for motivation, as such.
The nature of these two systems can best be understood by relating emotional state to motor activity, as we
have done previously.
Each hemisphere, right and left, appears to have what might be described as a family of related
functions, portrayed in Figure 11: The Twin Cerebral Hemispheres and their Functions. The right
hemisphere, less language-fluent than its generally more dominant twin, appears specialized for the
inhibition and extinction of behavior (and, therefore, for the production of negative emotion), for
generation and manipulation of complex visual (and auditory) images, for coordination of gross motor
actions, and for rapid and global recognition of patterns.152 The right hemisphere appears to come "on-line"
when a particular situation is rife with uncertainty - appears particularly good at governing behavior when
what is, and what to do, has not yet been clearly specified.153 It might be posited, in consequence, that this
hemisphere is still under limbic control - since the limbic system is responsible for detecting novelty and
initiating exploratory behavior. This archaic control mechanism would then "drive" the processes of
The Twin Cerebral Hemispheres and their Functions
The left hemisphere, by contrast, appears particularly skilled at linguistic processing and
communication, at detailed, linear thinking, at fine motor skill, and at the comprehension of wholes in
terms of their constituent elements.154 The left hemisphere - particularly its frontal or motor (sub)unit -
also governs approach behavior,155 in the presence of cues of satisfaction, is integrally involved in the
production of positive affect, and appears particularly good at carrying out practiced activities, at applying
familiar modes of apprehension. The left seems at its best when what is and what should be done are no
longer questions; when tradition governs behavior, and the nature and meaning of things has been fixed.
The dual specialization of the left - for what has been practiced, and for what is positive - can be
understood, in part, in the following manner: positive affect rules in known territory, by definition: a thing
or situation has been explored most optimally (and is therefore most well known) if it has been transformed
by behavioral adaptations manifested in its presence into something of determinate use (or satisfaction) or
into potential for such (into promise).
The right hemisphere, in contrast to the left, appears to have remained in direct contact with - appears
specialized for encounter with - the unknown and its terrors, which are apperceived in the domain of
instinct, motivation, and affect, long before they can be classified or comprehended intellectually. The right
hemisphere's capacity for inhibition and extinction of behavior (for inducing caution during exploration,
for governing flight, for producing negative affect) ensures that due respect is granted the inexplicable (and
therefore dangerous) when it makes its appearance. The right's aptitude for global pattern recognition
(which appears as a consequence of its basic neurophysiological structure156) helps ensure that a
provisional notion (a fantastic representation) of the unknown event (what it is like, how action should be
conducted in its presence, what other things or situations it brings to mind) might be rapidly formulated.
The right hemisphere appears integrally involved in the initial stages of analysis of the unexpected or novel
- and its a priori hypothesis is always this: this (unknown) place, this unfamiliar space, this unexplored
territory is dangerous, and therefore partakes in the properties of all other known dangerous places and
territories, and all those that remain unknown, as well. This form of information-processing - "a" is "b" -
is metaphor; generation of metaphor (key to the construction of narratives - dreams, dramas, stories and
64 








myth) might well be regarded as the first stage of hypothesis construction. As situation-specific adaptive
behaviors are generated, as a consequence of exploration, this provisional labelling or hypothesis (or
fantasy) might well undergo modification (assuming nothing actually punishing or determinately
threatening occurs); such modification constitutes further and more detailed learning. Anxiety recedes, in
the absence of punishment or further threat (including novelty); hope occupies the affective forefront,
accompanied by the desire to move forward, and to explore (under the governance of the left hemisphere).
The right hemisphere appears capable of dealing with less determinate information; can use forms of
cognition that are more diffuse, more global,157 and more encompassing to come to terms initially with
what cannot yet be understood, but which undeniably exists. It uses its capacity for massive generalization
and comprehension of imagery to place the novel stimulus in an initially meaningful context, which is the a
priori manner of appropriate categorization. This context is defined by the motivational significance of the
novel thing, which is revealed first by the mere fact of novelty (which makes it both threatening and
promising) and then in the course of its detailed exploration - and not by its objective sensory qualities (at
least not primarily). The right hemisphere remains concerned with answering the questions: "what is this
new thing like?" and this means - "what should be done in the presence of this unexpected occurrence?"
not "what is this thing objectively?" "What is the new thing like?" (which is a question about its
fundamental nature) means "is it dangerous, or threatening (first and foremost), satisfying or promising?'
[although each of these basic categories of affective value can be subdivided more particularly (can it be
eaten? can it eat me? will it serve as mate?)]. Categorization according to valence means that the thing is
what it signifies for behavior.
The chaos that constitutes the unknown is rendered predictable - is turned into the "world" - by the
generation of adaptive behaviors and modes of representation. It is the process of novelty-driven
exploration that, in the individual case, produces such behaviors and strategies of classification. However,
we are not only individuals; we exist in a very complex social environment - an environment characterized
by the constant exchange of information, regarding the means and ends of "proper" adaptation. The human
capacity for the generation of self-regulatory behavior and representation has been expanded immensely -
expanded in some ways, beyond our own comprehension - by our capacity for verbal and non-verbal
(primarily mimetic158) communication. We can mimic - and learn from - everyone who surrounds us, and
who we can directly contact. In addition, we can obtain information from everyone who can write -
assuming we are literate - or who could write, when they were alive. But there is more - we can also learn
from everyone who can act, in the natural course of things, or dramatically, and we can also store the
behaviors of individuals we come into contact with (directly, by copying them; or indirectly, through the
intermediation of narrative and dramatic art forms). Furthermore, our capacity for copying - for mimesis -
means that we are capable of doing things that we do not necessarily "understand" (that is, cannot describe
explicitly). It is for that reason, in part, that we need a "psychology."
Patterns of behavioral and representational adaptation are generated in the course of active exploration
and "contact with the unknown." These patterns do not necessarily remain stable, however, once generated.
They are modified and shaped - improved and made efficient - as a consequence of their communicative
exchange. Individual "a" produces a new behavior; "b" modifies it, "c" modifies that, "d" radically changes
"c's" modification - and so on, ad infinitum. The same process applies to representations (metaphors, say,
or explicit concepts). This means that our exploratory assimilative and accomodative processes actually
extend over vast periods of time and space (as anyone who has had a document-mediated "conversation"
with a great figure of the past is sure to appreciate). Some of this "extension" - perhaps the most obvious
part - is mediated by literacy. An equally complex and subtle element, however, is mediated by mimesis.
Patterns of behavioral adaptation and schemas of classification or representation can be derived from the
observation of others (and, for that matter, from the observation of oneself). How we act in the presence of
things, in their constantly shifting and generally social context, is what those things mean (or even what
they are), before what they mean (or what they are) can be more abstractly (or "objectively") categorized.
What a thing is, therefore, might be determined (in the absence of more useful information) by examination
of how action is conducted in its presence - which is to say that if someone runs from something it is safe
to presume that the thing is dangerous (the action in fact defines that presumption). The observation of
action patterns undertaken by the members of any given social community - including those of the
observing subject - therefore necessarily allows for the derivation and classification of provisional value
65 








schema. If you watch someone (even yourself) approach something then you can assume that the
approached thing is good, at least in some determinate context - even if you don't know anything else
about it. Knowing what to do, after all, is classification, before it is abstracted: classification in terms of
motivational relevance, with the sensory aspects of the phenomena serving merely as a cue to recall of that
motivational relevance.159
It is certainly the case that many of our skills - and our automatized strategies of classification - are
"opaque" to explicit consciousness. The fact of our multiple memory systems, and their qualitatively
different modes of representation - described later - ensures that such is the case. This opaqueness means,
essentially, that we "understand" more than we "know"; it is for this reason that psychologists continue to
depend on notions of the "unconscious" to provide explanations for behavior. This unconsciousness - the
psychoanalytic god - is our capacity for the implicit storage of information about the nature and valence of
things. This information is generated in the course of active exploration, and modified - often
unrecognizably - by constant, multigenerational, interpersonal communication. We live in social groups;
most of our interactions are social in nature. We spend most of our time around others and, when we are
alone, we still wish to understand, predict and control our personal behaviors. Our maps of the "understood
part of the world" are therefore in large part maps of patterns of actions - of behaviors established as a
consequence of creative exploration, and modified in the course of endless social interactions. We watch
ourselves act; from this action, we draw inferences about the nature of the world (including those acts that
are part of the world).
We know that the right hemisphere - at least its frontal portion - is specialized for response to
punishment and threat. We also know that damage to the right hemisphere impairs our ability to detect
patterns and to understand the meaning of stories.160 Is it too much to suggest that the emotional, imagistic
and narrative capabilities of the right hemisphere play a key role in the initial stages in the process of
transforming something novel and complex - such as the behaviors of others (or ourselves) and the valence
of new things - into something thoroughly understood? When we encounter something new, after all, we
generate fantasies (imagistic, verbal) about its potential nature. This means we attempt to determine how
the unexpected thing might relate to something we have already mastered - or, at least, to other things that
we have not yet mastered. To say "this unsolved problem appears to be like this other problem we haven't
yet solved" is a step on the way to solution. To say, "here is how these (still essentially mysterious)
phenomena appear to hang together" is an intuition, of the sort that precedes detailed knowledge - is the
capacity to see the forest, though not yet differentiating between the types of trees. Before we truly master
something novel (which means, before we can effectively limit its indeterminate significance to something
predictable, even irrelevant) we imagine what it might be. Our imaginative representations actually
constitute our initial adaptations - constitute part of the structure that we use to inhibit our responses to the
a priori significance of the unknown - even as they precede the generation of more detailed and concrete
information. There is no reason to presuppose that we have been able to explicitly comprehend this
capacity - in part because it actually seems to underly (to serve as a necessary or axiomatic precondition
for) our ability to understand, explicitly.
It appears that the pattern-recognition and spatial capacities of the right hemisphere appear to allow it to
derive from repeated observations of behavior images of action patterns that the verbal left can arrange,
with increasingly logic and detail, into stories. A story is a map of meaning, a "strategy" for emotional
regulation and behavioral output - a description of how to act in a circumstance, to ensure that the
circumstance retains its positive motivational salience (or at least has its negative qualities reduced to the
greatest possible degree). The story appears generated, in its initial stages, by the capacity for imagery and
pattern recognition characteristic of the right hemisphere, which is integrally involved in narrative
cognition,161 and in processes that aid or are analogous to such cognition: the ability to decode the
nonverbal and melodic aspects of speech, to empathize (or to engage, more generally, in interpersonal
relationships), and the capacity to comprehend imagery, metaphor, and analogy.162 The left-hemisphere
"linguistic" systems "finish" the story: adding logic, proper temporal order, internal consistency, verbal
representation, and possibility for rapid abstract explicit communication. In this way, our explicit
knowledge of value is expanded, through the analysis of our own "dreams." Interpretations that "work" -
that is, that improve our capacity to regulate our own emotions (to turn the current world into the desired
66 









world, to say it differently) qualify as valid. It is in this manner that we verify the accuracy of our
increasingly abstracted presumptions.
The process of creative exploration - the function of the knower, so to speak, who generates explored
territory - has as its apparent purpose increase in the breadth of motoric repertoire (skill) and alteration of
representational schema. Each of these two purposes appears served by the construction of a specific form
of knowledge, and its subsequent storage in permanent memory. The first form has been described as
knowing how. The motor unit, charged with origination of new behavioral strategies when old strategies fail
(when they produce undesired results), produces alternate action patterns, experimentally applied, to bring
about the desired result. Permanent instantiation of the new behavior, undertaken if the behavior is
successful, might be considered development of new skill. Knowing how is skill. The second type of
knowing, which is representational (which is an image or model of something, rather than the thing itself)
has been described as knowing that163 - I prefer knowing what. Exploration of a novel circumstance, event,
or thing, produces new sensory and affective input, during active or abstracted interaction of the exploring
subject and the object in question. This new sensory input constitutes grounds for the construction,
elaboration and update of a permanent but modifiable four-dimensional (spatial and temporal)
representational model of the experiential field, in its present and potential future manifestations. This
model, I would propose, is a story.
It is the hippocampal system - which, as we have seen, is an integral part of the regulation of anxiety -
that is critically involved in the transfer of information from observation of ongoing activity to permanent
memory, 164 and that provides the physiological basis (in concert with the higher cortical structures) for the
development and elaboration of this mnestic representation. It is the right hemisphere, which is activated by
the unknown, and which can generate patterns rapidly, that provides the initial imagery - the contents of
fantasy - for the story. It is the left hemisphere that gives these patterns structure and communicability (as
it does, for example, when it interprets a painting, a novel, a drama, a conversation - or a dream). The
hippocampus notes mismatch; this disinhibits the amygdala (perhaps not directly). Such disinhibition
"releases" anxiety and curiosity, driving exploration. The right hemisphere, under these conditions of
motivation, derives patterns relevant to encapsulation of the emergent unknown, from the information at its
disposal. Much of this information can be extracted from the social environment, and the behavioral
interactions and strategies of representation - emergent properties of exploration and communication -that
are "embedded" in the social structure. Much of this "information" is still implicit - that is, coded in
behavioral pattern. It is still knowing how, before it has been abstracted and made explicit as knowing
what. The left-hemisphere gets increasingly involved, as translation "up the hierarchy of abstraction"
occurs.
Knowing-how infovmation, described alternatively as procedural, habitual, dispositional, or skilled, and
knowing-what information, described alternatively as declarative, episodic, factual, autobiographical, or
representational, appear physiologically distinct in their material basis, and separable in course of phyloand
ontogenetic development.165 Procedural knowledge develops long before declarative knowledge, in
evolution and individual development, and appears represented in "unconscious" form, expressible purely
in performance. Declarative knowledge, by contrast - knowledge of what - simultaneously constitutes
consciously accessible and communicable episodic imagination (the world in fantasy) and subsumes even
more recently developed semantic (linguistic) knowledge, whose operations, in large part, allow for
abstract representation of the contents of the imagination, and communication thereof. Squire and ZolaMorgan166
have represented the relationship between these memory forms according to the schematic of
Figure 12: The Multiple Structure of Memory.
167 The neuroanatomical basis of knowing how remains
relatively unspecified. Skill generation appears in part as the domain of the cortical pre/motor unit;
"storage" appears to involve the cerebellum. Knowing what, by contrast, appears dependent for its
existence on the intact function of the cortical sensory unit, in interplay with the hippocampal system.168
Much of our knowing what, however - our description of the world - is about knowing how, which is
behavioral knowledge - wisdom. Much of our descriptive knowledge - representational knowledge - is
representation of what constitutes wisdom (without being that wisdom, itself). We have gained our
description of wisdom by watching how we act, in our culturally-governed social interactions, and by
representing those actions.

We know how, which means how to act to transform the mysterious and ever-threatening world of the
present into what we desire, long before we know how we know how, or why we know how. This is to say,
for example, that a child learns to act appropriately (assuming it does) long before it can provide abstracted
explanations for or descriptions of its behavior.169 A child can be "good," without being a moral
philosopher. This idea echoes the developmental psychologist Jean Piaget's notion, with regards to child
development, that adaptation at the sensorimotor level occurs prior to - and lays the groundwork for - the
more abstracted forms of adaptation that characterize adulthood. Piaget regarded imagistic representation
as an intermediary between sensorimotor intelligence and the (highest or most abstract) stage of "formal
operations"; furthermore, he believed that imitation - the "acting out" of an object - served as a necessary
prerequisite to such imagistic representation (portrayal in image or word, instead of behavior). The process
of play appears as a higher-order, or more abstract form of imitation, from this perspective. Piaget presents
two main theses:
"The first is that in the field of play and imitation it is possible to trace the transition from sensory-motor
assimilation and accomodation to the mental assimilation and accomodation which characterize the
beginnings of representation.... [The second is that] the various forms of representation interact. There is
representation when an absent model is imitated. There is representation in symbolic play, in
imagination and even in dreams, the systems of concepts and logical relations, both in their intuitive and
operational forms, implies representation."0
Piaget believed that imitation could be described in terms of accomodation: "... if there is primacy of
accomodation (matching of behavior) over assimilation (altering of schemas)... the activity tends to become
imitation."1 This implies that the imitating child in fact embodies more information than he "understands"
(represents). He continues: "representation... can be seen to be a kind of interiorized imitation, and
therefore a continuation of accomodation."2 [With regards to the three-memory-system model (which
Piaget is of course not directly referring to): "... even if there were justification for relating the various
stages of mental development to well-defined neurological levels, the fact remains that, in spite of the
68 








relative discontinuity of the structures, there is a certain functional continuity, each structure preparing for
its successors while utilizing its predecessors."]
What can be said of children appears true, more or less, phylogenetically: our cultures (which we absorb
as children, through the processes of imitation) consist primarily of patterns of activity, undertaken in a
social context. As parents are to children, cultures are to adults: we do not know how the patterns we act
out (or the concepts we utilize) originated, or what precise "purposes" (what long term "goals") they
currently serve - these patterns are in fact "emergent properties" of long-term social interactions.
Furthermore, we cannot describe such patterns well, abstractly (explicitly, semantically) - even though we
duplicate them accurately (and unconsciously) in our behavior (and can represent them, episodically, in our
literary endeavors). We do not know why we do what we do - or, to say the same thing, what it is that we
are (all ideological theories to the contrary). We watch ourselves, and wonder; our wonder takes the shape
of the story or, more fundamentally, the myth. Myths describing the known, explored territory, constitute
what we know about our knowing how, before we can state, explicitly, what it is that we know how. Myth
is, in part, the image of our adaptive action, as formulated by imagination, before its explicit containment in
abstract language; myth is the intermediary between action, and abstract linguistic representation of that
action. Myth is the distilled essence of the stories we tell ourselves about the patterns of our own behavior -
and about the inevitable consequences of those patterns, as they play themselves out in the social and
impersonal worlds of experience. We learn the story, which we do not understand (which is to say, cannot
make explicit), by watching. We represent the action patterns we encounter in action - that is, in ritual -
and in image, and word: we act, then represent our behavior, ever more abstractly (ever more explicitly,
"consciously").
The central features of our (socially-determined) behavior thus become key elements - characters - in
our stories (just like the procedural elements of the emergent games of interacting children become explicit
"rules" later in development). The generation and constant refinement of these stories, told and retold over
centuries, allows us to determine ever more clearly just what it is that proper (and improper) behavior
consists of, in an environment permanently characterized by the interplay between security and
unpredictability. We are extremely (uncontrollably) imitative, appallingly social, and interminably
exploratory. These characteristics allow us to generate and communicate represented images, and,
simultaneously, serve as the focal point of inquiry for those images. Our capacity for creative action frees
us, constantly, from the ever-shifting demands of the "environment." The ability to represent creative
action - to duplicate observed creativity in our own actions, and to represent that creativity in detail and
essence - allows everyone to benefit from the creative action of everyone else (at least everyone with
whom communication might conceivably take place). The fact of our sociability ensures that our adaptive
behaviors are structured with the social community in mind - at least in the long run - and increases our
chances of exposure to creative intelligence. We observe others acting, in a manner we find admirable, and
duplicate their actions. In this manner, we obtain the skills of others. Our capacity for abstraction allows us
to take our facility for imitation one step farther, however: we can learn to imitate not only the precise
behaviors that constitute adaptation, but the process by which those behaviors were generated. This means
- we can learn not only skill, but meta-skill (can learn to mimic the pattern of behavior that generates new
skills). It is the encapsulation of meta-skill in a story that makes that story great.
Our imitative proclivity, expressed in behavior, appears to find its more abstracted counterpart in the
ability to admire, which is a permanent, innate or easily acquired constituent element of our intraspsychic
state. This capability for awe, this desire to copy, often serves to impel further psychological and cognitive
development. The worshipful attitude that small boys adopt towards their heroes, for example, constitutes
the outward expression of the force that propels them towards embodying, or incarnating (or even
inventing) oft ill-defined heroic qualities themselves. The capacity for imitation surfaces in more abstract
guise in the human tendency to act "as-if"4- to identify with another - to become another, in fantasy
(which means, to ritually identify with or unconsciously adopt the story of another). (This means - the
ability to adopt someone else's goal, as if it were yours.175) The capacity to act "as if" expresses itself in
admiration (ranging in intensity from the simple respect accorded a competent other, to abject worship)
and, even more abstractly, in ideological possession. No independent "instinct" necessarily needs to be
postulated, to account for this mimetic ability (although one may well exist): all that may be necessary is
the capacity to observe that another has obtained a goal that is also valued by the observer (that observation
69 









provides the necessary motivation), and the skill to duplicate the procedures observed to lead to such
fulfillment.
Mimetic propensity, expressed in imitative action, provides for tremendous expansion of behavioral
competence176; allows the ability of each to become the capability of all. Precise duplicative facility,
however, still retains pronounced limitations. Specific behaviors retain their adaptive significance only
within particular, restricted environments (only within bounded frames of reference). If environmental
contingencies shift (for whatever reason), the utility of strategies designed for the original circumstance
(and transmitted through imitation) may become dramatically restricted, or even reversed. The capacity for
abstraction of imitation - which is, in the initial stages, capability for dramatic play - overcomes the
specific restrictions of exact imitation, elaborating reproduction of particular acts, removing the behavior to
be copied from its initial specific context, establishing its first-level declarative representation and
generalization. Play allows for the permanent extension of competence and confidence through pretence,
which means through metaphoric and symbolic action (which is semantic use of episodic representation),
and for natural expansion of behavioral range from safe, predictable, self-defined contexts, out towards the
unknown world of experience. Play creates a world in "rule-governed" fantasy - in episodic or imagistic
representation - in which behavior can be rehearsed and mastered, prior to its expression in the real world,
with real-world consequences. Play is another form of "as-if" behavior, that allows for experimentation
with fictional narratives: pretended descriptions of the current and desired future states of the world, with
plans of action appended, designed to change the former into the latter. To play means to set - or to
fictionally transform - "fictional" goals. Such fictional goals give valence to phenomena that would, in
other contexts, remain meaningless (but valence that is informative, without being serious). Play allows us
to experiment with means and ends themselves, without subjecting ourselves to the actual consequences of
"real" behavior - and to benefit emotionally, in the process. The goals of play are fictional; the incentive
rewards, however, that accompany movement to a fictitious goal - these are real (although bounded, like
game-induced anxieties). The bounded reality of such affect accounts, at least in part, for motivation to play
- for the intrinsic interest that accompanies play (or immersion in any dramatic activity).
Play transcends imitation, in that it is less context-bound; it allows for the abstraction of essential
principles from specific (admirable) instances of behavior - allows for the initial establishment of a more
general model of what constitutes allowable (or ideal) behavior. Elaboration of dramatic play into formal
drama likewise ritualizes play, abstracting its key elements one level more, and further distills the vitally
interesting aspects of behavior - which are representative (by no mere chance) of that active heroic/social
(exploratory and communicative) pattern upon which all adaptation is necessarily predicated. Theatrical
ritual dramatically represents the individual and social consequences of stylized, distilled behavioral
patterns, based in their expression upon different assumptions of value and expectations of outcome.
Formal drama clothes potent ideas in personality, exploring different paths of directed or motivated action,
playing out conflict, cathartically, offering ritual models for emulation or rejection. Dramatic personae
embody the behavioral wisdom of history. In an analogous fashion, in a less abstract, less ritualized
manner, the continuing behavior of parents dramatizes cumulative mimetic history for children.
Emergence of narrative - which, paradoxically, contains much more information than it explicitly
presents - further disembodies the knowledge extant latently in behavioral pattern. Narrative presents
semantic representation of play, or drama - of essentially abstracted episodic representations of social
interaction and individual endeavor - and allows behavioral patterns contained entirely in linguistic
representation to incarnate themselves in dramatic form on the private stage of individual imagination.
Much of the information derived from a story is actually already contained in episodic memory. In a sense,
it could be said that the words of the story merely act as a retrieval cue for information already in the
mnestic system (of the listener), although perhaps not yet transformed into a form capable either of explicit
(semantic) communication, or alteration of procedure.177 178 It is for this reason that Shakespeare might be
viewed as a precursor to Freud (think of Hamlet): Shakespeare "knew" what Freud later "discovered" - but
he knew it more implicitly, more imagistically, more procedurally. (This is not say that Shakespeare was
any less brilliant - just that his level of abstraction was different.) Ideas, after all, come from somewhere -
they do not arise, spontaneously, from the void. Every complex psychological theory has a lengthy period
of historical development - development that might not be evidently linked to the final emergence of the
theory.
70 




Interpretation of the reason for dramatic consequences, portrayed in narrative - generally left to the
imagination of the audience - constitutes analysis of the moral of the story. Transmission of that moral -
that rule for behavior, or representation - is the purpose of narrative, just as fascination, involuntary seizure
of interest, is its (biologically-predetermined) means. With development of the story, mere description of
critically important (and therefore compelling) behavioral/representational patterns becomes able to
promote active imitation. At this point the semantic system, activating images in episodic memory, sets the
stage for the alteration of procedure itself. This means establishment of a "feedback loop," wherein
information can cycle up and down "levels of consciousness" - with the social environment as necessary
intermediary - transforming itself and expanding as it moves. Development of narrative means verbal
abstraction of knowledge disembodied in episodic memory and embodied in behavior; means capability to
disseminate such knowledge widely and rapidly throughout a communicating population, with minimal
expenditure of time and energy; means intact preservation of such knowledge, simply and accurately, for
generations to come. Narrative description of archetypal behavioral patterns and representational schemas -
myth - appears as an essential precondition for social construction and subsequent regulation of complexly
civilized individual presumption, action and desire.
It is only after behavioral (procedural) wisdom has become "represented" in episodic memory, and
portrayed in drama and narrative, that it becomes accessible to "conscious" verbal formulation (procedural
knowledge is not representational, in its basic form) and to (potential) modification, in abstraction.
Knowing how information, generated in the course of exploratory activity, can nonetheless be transferred
from individual to individual, in the social community, through means of imitation. Piaget points out, for
example, that children first act upon objects, and determine object- "properties" in accordance with these
actions, and then almost immediately imitate themselves, turning their own initial spontaneous actions into
something to be represented and ritualized.179 The same process occurs in interpersonal interaction, where
the other person's action rapidly becomes something to be imitated, and then ritualized (and then abstracted
and codified further). A shared rite, where each person's behavior is modified by the other, can therefore
emerge in the absence of "consciousness" of the structure of the rite; however, once the social ritual is
established, its structure can rapidly become described and codified (presuming sufficient cognitive ability
and level of maturation). This process can in fact be observed during the spontaneous construction (and
then codification) of children's games.180 It is the organization of such "games" - and their elaboration,
through repeated communication - that constitutes the basis for the construction of culture itself.
Behavior is imitated, then abstracted into play, formalized into drama and story, crystallized into myth
and codified religion - and only then criticized in philosophy, and provided, post-hoc, with rational
underpinnings. Explicit philosophical statements regarding the grounds for and nature of ethical behavior,
stated in a verbally comprehensible manner, were not established through rational endeavor - their framing
as such is (clearly) a secondary endeavor, as Nietzsche recognized:
"What the scholars called a 'rational foundation for morality' and tried to supply was, seen in the right
light, merely a scholarly expression of the common faith in the prevalent morality; a new means of
expression for this faith."81
Explicit (moral) philosophy arises from the mythos of culture, grounded in procedure, rendered
progressively more abstract and episodic through ritual action, and observation of that action. The process
of increasing abstraction has allowed the knowing what "system" to generate a representation, in
imagination, of the "implicit predicates" of behavior governed by the knowing how "system." Generation of
such information was necessary to simultaneously insure accurate prediction of the behavior of others (and
of the self), and to program predictable social behavior through exchange of abstracted moral (procedural)
information. Nietzsche states, further:
"That individual philosophical concepts are not anything capricious or autonomously evolving, but grow
up in connection and relationship with each other; that, however suddenly and arbitrarily they seem to
appear in the history of thought, they nevertheless belong just as much to a system as all the members of
the fauna of a continent - is betrayed in the end also by the fact that the most diverse philosophers keep
filling in a definite fundamental scheme of possible philosophies. Under an invisible spell, they always
revolve once more in the same orbit; however independent of each other they may feel themselves with
71 






their critical or systematic wills, something within them leads them, something impels them in a definite
order, one after the other - to wit, the innate systematic structure and relationship of their concepts.
Their thinking is, in fact, far less a discovery than a recognition, a remembering, a return and a
homecoming to a remote, primordial, and inclusive household of the soul, out of which those concepts
grew originally: philosophizing is to this extent a kind of atavism of the highest order."82
The knowing what system, declarative (episodic and semantic), has developed a description of knowing
how activity - procedure - through a complex, lengthy process of abstraction. Action and imitation of
action developmentally predates explicit description or discovery of the rules governing action. Adaptation
through play and drama preceded development of linguistic thought, and provided the ground from which it
emerged. Each developmental "stage" - action, imitation, play, ritual, drama, narrative, myth, religion,
philosophy, rationality - offers an increasingly abstracted, generalized and detailed representation of the
behavioral wisdom embedded in and established during the previous stage. The introduction of semantic
representation to the human realm of behavior allowed for continuance and ever-increasing extension of the
cognitive process originating in action, imitation, play, and drama. Language turned drama into mythic
narrative, narrative into formal religion, and religion into critical philosophy, providing for exponential
expansion of adaptive ability. Consider Nietzsche's words, yet again:
"Gradually it has become clear to me what every great philosophy so far has been: namely, the personal
confession of its author and a kind of involuntary and unconscious memoir; also that the moral (or
immoral) intentions in every philosophy constituted the real germ of life from which the whole plant had
grown."83
The procedural system provides (constitutes?) memory for behavior. Such memory includes imitative
representation of behaviors generated spontaneously in the course of creative individual action, whose
precise circumstance of origins have been lost in the mists of history, but which have been integrated into a
consistent behavioral pattern, over time - integrated into culturally-determined character. Integration
means active balance of competing subjectively-grounded motivational demands within the context of the
social environment; means internalization of socially-regulated behavioral expression of subjective desire.
Such internalization constitutes construction of a value (dominance) hierarchy - determination of the
relative contextual propriety (morality) of imitated or otherwise incorporated patterns of action. Such
construction inevitably "precedes" episodic or semantic representation of the basis of the construction,
although such second-order representation, once established, becomes capable (indirectly) of modifying
procedure itself (as what is imagined can then be acted out). This is the loop that feeds the development of
explicit "consciousness" itself: procedure is established, then represented, then altered in abstraction, then
practiced; the procedure changes, as a consequence of the abstracted and practiced modification; this
change in turn produces an alteration in its representation, and so on, and so on, from individual to
individual, down the chain of generations. This process can occur "externally," as a consequence of social
interaction, or "internally," as a consequence of word and image-mediated abstract exploratory activity
("thought"). This interactive loop - and its putative relationship to underlying cognitive/memory structures
- is represented schematically in Figure 13: Abstraction of Wisdom, and the Relationship of Such
Abstraction to Memory. (Only a few of the interactions between the "stages" of knowledge are indicated,
for the sake of schematic simplicity.)
Behavioral knowledge is generated during the process of creative exploration. The consequences of such
exploration - the adaptive behavioral patterns generated - are imitated, and represented more abstractly.
Play allows for the generalization of imitated knowledge, and for the integration of behaviors garnered
from different sources (one "good thing to do" may conflict in a given situation with another; "good things
to do" therefore have to be ranked in terms of their context-dependent value, importance or dominance).
Each succeeding stage of abstraction modifies all others, as our ability to speak, for example, has expanded
our capacity to play. As the process of abstraction continues - and information vital for survival is
represented evermore simply and efficiently - what is represented transforms from the particulars of any
given adaptive actions to the most general and broadly appropriate pattern of adaptation - that of creative
exploration itself. This is to say: individual acts of "heroism," so to speak (that is, acts of voluntary and
successful encounter with the unknown) might be broadly imitated; might elicit spontaneous imitation. But
72 


some more essential ("prototypical"84) feature(s) characterize all acts of heroism. With increasing
abstraction and breadth of representation, the essential features comes to dominate the particular. As
Eliade185 points out: traditional (that is, nonliterate) cultures have a historical memory that may be only
three generations long - that is, as long as the oldest surviving individual is old. Events that occurred
previous to this are telescoped into something akin to the aboriginal Australian's "dreamtime": into the
"trans-historical" period when ancestral heroes walked the earth, and established the behavioral patterns
that constitute the present mode of being. This telescoping is the "mythologization" of history - and is very
useful, from the perspective of efficient storage. We learn to imitate (and to remember) not individual
heroes - not the "objective" historical figures of the past - but what those heroes represented: the pattern of
action that made them heroes. That pattern is - to say it once again - the act of voluntary and successful
encounter with the unknown: the generation of wisdom through exploration. (I am not trying to imply,
either, that the semantic or episodic memory systems can directly modify procedure; it is more that the
operations of the semantic/episodic systems alter the world, and world-alterations alter procedure. The
effect of language and image on behavior is generally secondary - mediated through the environment - but
is no less profound for that).
Abstraction of Wisdom, and the Relationship of Such Abstraction to Memory
The fact that the many "stories" we live by can be coded and transmitted at different levels of
"abstraction," ranging from the purely motoric or procedural (transmitted through imitation) to the more
purely semantic (transmitted through the medium of explicit ethical philosophy, say) makes comprehension
of their structure and inter-relationships conceptually difficult. This difficulty is compounded by the fact
that different stories have different spatial-temporal "resolutions," - that is, that we may be governed at one
73 





moment by short-term, simple considerations and at the next by longer-term, more complex considerations.
Someone married might think, for example, "I find my friend's spouse particularly attractive; I would like
to make love to him or her," - evaluating that individual, positively - and then, immediately, correct: "My
friend's spouse flirts too much for his or her own good, and looks like a lot of trouble." Perhaps both these
viewpoints are valid. It is certainly not uncommon for the same "stimulus" to possess competing valences.
Otherwise - as I said before - we would never have to think.
Every apprehensible phenomenon has a multitude of potential uses and significances. It is for this reason
that it is possible for each of us to drown in possibility. Even something as simple as a piece of paper is not
simple at all - except insofar as implicit contextual determinants make it appear so. Wittgenstein asks:
"Point to a piece of paper. - And now point to its shape - now to its colour - now to its number (that
sounds queer). - How did you do it? - You will say that you 'meant' a different thing each time you
pointed. And if I ask how that is done, you will say you concentrated your attention on the colour, the
shape, etc. But I ask again: how is that done?"86
A kitchen knife, for example: is it something to cut up vegetables, at dinner? Something to draw, for a still
life? Something to cut up vegetables, at dinner? A toy, for mumblety-peg? A screwdriver, to fix a shelf?
Or, perhaps - an implement of murder? In the first four cases, it "possesses" a positive valence. In the last
case, it is negative - unless you are experiencing a frenzy of rage. How is its essential functional and
affective multiplicity reduced to something singular and, therefore, useful? You can't fix the shelf and
make dinner at the same time, and in the same place. You may need to do both, at some point, however -
and this means that you must maintain the multiple uses and valences as possibilities (whatever that
implies). This means that you must (1) decide on one course of action, and eliminate all the rest, yet (2)
retain the others, for "future consideration" - to ensure that your range of possible actions remains as broad
as possible.
How is this ever-present competition to be ameliorated? How might the process of amelioration be
considered, with regard to the additional complicating fact of the multi-level embodiment and abstraction
of stories? So far we have considered the "ends" and the "means" of a given framework of reference (a
story) as qualitatively different phenomena - echoing a dilemma that pervades ethics, as a field of study.
The "end" or goal of a given planned sequence of behavior constitutes an image of the desired future,
which serves as point of contrast, for the "unbearable" present. The "means" by which this end might be
attained comprises the actual behavioral steps that might be undertaken, in pursuit of such desirable change.
This seems a very reasonable perspective, in that at any given moment "means" and "ends" might be
usefully distinguished. Where we are going is evidently different than how we will get there. This
conceptual utility is only provisional, however - and the fact of the "means/end" distinction actually
obscures more detailed and comprehensive description. "Means" and "ends" - plans and goals - are not
qualitatively different, in any final sense, and can be transformed, one into the other, at any moment. Such
transformation occurs, in fact, whenever a problem arises: whenever the unknown manifests itself, in the
course of our ongoing behavior. It is in this manner that we switch spatial-temporal resolution (change
"set" or shift our "frames of reference"), in order to re-evaluate our actions, and re-consider the propriety of
our wishes.
Our stories - our frames of reference - appear to have a "nested" or "hierarchical" structure. At any
given moment, our "attention" only occupies one level of that structure. This "capacity for restricted
attention" gives us the capability to make provisional but necessary judgments about the valence and utility
of phenomena. However, we can also "shift levels of abstraction" - which means, can voluntarily focus our
attention, when necessary, on stories that map out larger or smaller areas of space-time (excuse the
Einsteinian reference, but it is in fact accurate in this case, as our stories have a duration, as well as an
area). "When necessary" means depending on the status of our current operations. For example: you are in
the kitchen; you want to read a book in your study. An image of you reading a book - in your favorite chair
- thus occupies the "ends" or "desired future" pole of your currently operational story (contrasted with the
still-too-illiterate you of the present time). This "story" might have a conceived duration of, say, ten
minutes; in addition, it "occupies" a universe defined by the presence of a half-dozen relevant "objects" (a
reading lamp, a chair, the floor you have to walk on to get to your chair, the book itself, your reading
74 




glasses) and the limited space they occupy. You make it to your chair. Your book is at hand. You reach up
to turn on the reading light - flash! - the bulb burns out. The unknown - that is, the unexpected, in this
context - has just manifested itself. You switch "set." Now your goal - still nested within the "reading a
book" story - is "fix the reading lamp." You adjust your plans, find a new bulb, and place it in the lamp.
Flash! It burns out again. This time you smell burnt wire. This is worrisome. The book is now forgotten -
irrelevant, given the current state of affairs. Is there something wrong with the lamp (and, therefore - at a
slightly more general level - with all future plans, that depend on that lamp)? You explore. The lamp
doesn't smell. It's the electrical outlet, in the wall! The plate covering the outlets is hot! What does that
mean? You shift your apprehension up several levels of spatial-temporal resolution. Maybe there is
something wrong with the wiring of the house, itself! The lamp is now forgotten. Ensuring that your house
does not burn down has suddenly taken priority. How does this shift in attention occur?
Conceptual Transformation of the Means/Ends Relationship from Static to Dynamic
Figure 14: Conceptual Transformation of the Means/Ends Relationship from Static to Dynamic
presents a tripartite schematic, designed to take us from the state where we conceptualize means and ends
as distinct, to the state where we see them as isomorphic elements, given distinct status only on a
provisional basis. Subdiagram (1) is familiar, and represents the "normal" story, composed of present state,
desired future state, and three of the various means that might be utilized, in order to transform the former
into the latter. This subdiagram is predicated on the presumption that many means might be used to get
from point "a" to point "b"; in truth, however, only one means (the "most efficient" or otherwise desirable)
will be employed at any one time. (We only have one motor output system, after all - and, therefore, one
"consciousness"?) Subdiagram (2) is a transformed version of (1), showing that the "plans" of (1) can
75 













better be conceptualized as "stories," in and of themselves - showing that a "big" story (one that occupies a
large spatial-temporal domain) is actually composed of nested "little" stories. Subdiagram (2) is still
predicated on the presumption that a number of smaller stories might be used as means for a larger end. If
your company is failing, you might fire half your employees, branch out into a new product line, or cut the
salaries of your upper management. Each of these approaches - all designed for the same purpose - are
clearly different (and complex) in their internal structure. You might do more than one thing - but - if two
of these multiple things conflict, one will have to be made subordinate to the other. Plans (and ends) are
granted comparative importance, and organized accordingly (in a structure that, by the way, is very much
like a dominance hierarchy). This state of affairs - where the relative importance of (potentially competing)
plans has been fixed - is represented, in subdiagram (3), which will be our representation of choice, for the
remainder of this discussion.187
At any given place and time, we are considering only a fixed number of "variables," as means and ends.
This is absolutely necessary, as action requires exclusion, as much (or more) as inclusion.188 However,
those things we consider as "relevant variables" (and their status as relevant, or not) have to be mutable.
We have to decide, yet retain the capacity to alter our decisions. Our prefrontal cortex - critical to goaldirected
action189 - appears to allow us this freedom: it does so, by "temporally sequencing" events and
actions,190 by considering "contextual information" and using that consideration to govern behavior,191 and
by "shifting set."92 It performs this multiplicity of operations, I submit, by considering one thing, then
another, as the currently-operative "consummatory reward" - as the goal towards which behavior is to be
devoted, as the "desired future" against which the "unbearable present," in the form of emergent
experience, is to be compared and evaluated. The structure in Figure 14, subdiagram (3), is a multilevel,
nested structure, composed of interdependent goals and plans - interdependent goals and plans that, in
totality, comprise the "life-story." This conceptualization helps explain the idea of a "step along the way"
(a stairway or ladder to Heaven, metaphorically speaking).193
Each step - each substory - has the "same" structure (but not the same content) as all those stories
"above" and "below." This means that all the elements of a "good" story might be expected to mirror, in
some profound manner, all the other elements: that a story, like the world itself, might be read (and read
correctly) at multiple and multiply informative "levels of analysis." This gives "good" stories their
polysemous quality. It is for this reason that Frye can state:
"One of the commonest experiences in reading is the sense of further discoveries to be made within the
same structure of words. The feeling is approximately 'there is more to be got out of this,' or we may
say, of something we particularly admire, that every time we read it we get something new out of it."94
A phenomenon that constitutes a goal at one "level" might be regarded as an incentive reward at the
next, since the attainment of subsidiary goals are preconditions for the attainment of higher-level goals (this
implies that most consummatory rewards will simultaneously possess an incentive aspect). The cognitive
operations dependent upon the intact prefrontal cortex can move up and down these levels, so to speak,
fixating at one, and allowing for determinate action, when that is deemed most appropriate (making the
others "implicit" at that place and time); "reorganizing" and "reconstituting" the levels and their respective
"statuses," when that becomes necessary. Figure 15: Bounded Revolution sheds light on this process and,
simultaneously, on the conundrum of relative novelty. How can a thing be radically new, somewhat new,
somewhat familiar, or completely familiar? The simple answer is - a given phenomenon (a "thing" or
"situation") can have its utility and/or meaning transformed at one level of analysis, but not at another. This
means that novelty can be "bounded"; that something can be new in one manner, but remain familiar at
another. This upper "familiar" level provides "walls" of security; provides the stable structure within which
necessary change can occur, without catastrophe.
Here is an exemplary "story": I am an undergraduate. I want to be a doctor. I am not sure exactly why,
but that question has never become relevant (which is to say, my desire is an implicit presumption - an
axiom of my behavior). I did well in high school. I have good marks in university, as a pre-med student. I
take the MCAT. I fail: twentieth percentile. Suddenly - and unexpectedly - I am not going to be a doctor.
The walls come tumbling down. My emotions, which were held in check by the determinate valences my
ongoing story gave to experiential phenomena, now (re)emerge, viciously - in chaos. I am a depressed and
anxious wreck. As I recover, I re-evaluate my life. I am discplined and have good academic skills. I like
76 


??????????????
???????
??????
?????????????
???????????
?????????


university; I like working with people. Many of the upper-level stories necessary upon which the doctor
story was implicitly predicated are still intact, and do not need modification. Farther up the hierarchy,
then! - maybe, for the first time. We do not question a story, when it is working! If it produces the desired
results, it is correct! Why did I want to be a doctor? For monetary security. Because it was expected of me
(for reasons of tradition - my father was a doctor). For reasons of status. Because I could appease the
suffering of others, and be a good person. So - hierarchical organization [this takes (or even is) thought]:
(1) I want to help people; (2) I need some monetary security; (3) I would like to stay in the health
profession; (4) perhaps status is not as important as I thought (and might therefore be "sacrificed," to
appease the angry gods, and restore order to the cosmos). I will become a medical technician; or maybe
even a nurse. I can still be a "good person," even if I'm not a doctor - and, perhaps, that is the most
important thing of all. Reorganization completed. Utility of experiential phenomena re-established.
Emotional integrity and stability re-attained. Good thing I didn't do myself in!
Bounded Revolution
It is interesting - and instructive - to consider Eastern representations of reality (that is, of the
"cosmos") in light of this conceptualization. Reality is made up of nested interpretations, that give
determinate form to "objects" (as implements) and to the valence of those objects. Every interpretation,
however, is subject to transformation, at every level. This constant (and necessary) transformation, in
conjunction with the fact of at least transient (and necessary) stability, makes up the "world." Mircea Eliade
describes the Indian version of the doctrine of the "eternal return" - the endlessly nested, cyclical nature of
the "universe" (conceived of as the totality of experience, and not as "objective reality"):
77 








"A complete cycle, a mahayuga, comprises 12,000 years. It ends with a dissolution, a pralaya, which is
repeated more drastically (mahapralaya, the Great Dissolution) at the end of the thousandth cycle. For
the paradigmatic schema "creation-destruction-creation-etc." is reproduced ad infinitum. The 12,000
years of a mahayuga were regarded as divine years, each with a duration of 360 years, which gives a
total of 4,320,000 years for a single cosmic cycle. A thousand such mahayugas make up a kalpa (form);
14 kalpas make up a manvantara (so named because each manvantara is supposed to be ruled by Manu,
the mythical Ancestor-King). A kalpa is equivalent to a day in the life of Brahma; a second kalpa to a
night. One hundred of these "years" of Brahma, in other words 311,000 milliards of human years,
constitute the life of Brahma. But even this duration of the god's life does not exhaust time, for the gods
are not eternal and the cosmic creations and destructions succeed one another forever."95
Every novelty-inspired, exploration-driven "learning experience" has a revolutionary element; it is just
that those reconstructions that involve stories with very limited "sizes" (that is, spatial-temporal areas) only
release a proportionate amount of emotion. The "normal/ revolutionary" dichotomy is, therefore, not valid -
it is always a matter of degree. Small scale irritations require minor life-story modifications. Large-scale
catastrophes, by contrast, undermine everything. The "biggest disasters" occur when the largest stories that
we play out are threatened with dissolution, as a consequence of radical "environmental" transformation.
Such transformation may occur in the natural course of things, when an earthquake or similar "act of God"
takes place; may be generated internally, as a consequence of heretic action; or may emerge when the
"foreign devils" - emissaries of chaos - threaten our explored territories (our nested stories, our cultural
stability). In the latter case, we may well turn to war - as an alternative deemed emotionally desirable, in
comparison to the overwhelming existential threat posed by the (potential) destruction of our large-scale
stories.
Our stories are nested (one thing leads to another) and hierarchically arranged [pursuit "a" is
superordinate to pursuit "b" (love is more important than money)]. Within this nested hierarchy, our
"consciousness" - our apperception - appears to have a "natural" level of resolution, or categorization. This
"default resolution" is reflected in the fact, as alluded to previously, of the "basic object level." We "see"
some things naturally; that is, in Roger Brown's terminology, at a level that gives us "maximal information
with minimal cognitive effort 196." I don't know what drives the mechanism that determines the appropriate
level of analysis. Elements of probability and predictability must play a role. It is, after all, increasingly
useless to speculate over increasingly large spatial-temporal areas, as the number of variables that must be
considered increases rapidly, even exponentially (and the probability of accurate prediction, therefore,
decreases). Perhaps the answer is something along the lines of "the simplest solution that does not generate
additional evident problems wins" - which I suppose is a variant of Occam's razor. So the simplest
cognitive/exploratory maneuver that renders an unpredictable occurrence conditionally predictable or
familiar is most likely to be adopted. This is another example of proof through utility - if a solution
"works," (serves to further progress towards a given goal) - then it is "right." Perhaps it is the frontal cortex
that determines what might be the most parsimonious possible context, within which a given novel
occurrence might be evaluated. So the notion would be that a novel occurrence initiates an exploratory
procedure, part of which is devoted to determining the level of analysis most appropriate for conducting an
evaluation. This would involve the shifting of stories. Also: a given "stimulus" is obviously not evaluated
at all possible levels of analysis, simultaneously. This would constitute an impossible cognitive burden. It
seems that the cortex must temporarily "fixate" at a chosen level, and then act "as if" that is the only
relevant level. Though this maneuver, the valence of something can appear similarly fixed. It is only this
"arbitrary" restriction of "data" that makes understanding - and action - possible.
We are adapted, as biological organisms, to construe our environment as a domain with particular
temporal and spatial "borders" - that is, as a place of a certain size, with a fixed duration. Within that
"environment," conceived of as that certain size and duration, certain phenomena "leap out at us," and "cry
out to be named."97 Whenever those "natural categories" of interpretation and their associated schemas of
action fail us, however, we have to look up and down the scale of spatial-temporal resolution. We do this
by looking at the "big picture," when we have to, or by "focusing in" on "details" that may have previously
escaped us. Both the "details" and the "big picture" may be considered as dwindling or trailing off into,
first, the "unconscious" (where they exist as "potential objects of cognition") and then, the "unknown"
78 

(where they exist as "latent information" or as "undiscovered facts"). The "unconscious" may then be
considered as the mediator between the unknown, which surrounds us constantly, and the domain that is so
familiar to us that its contents have been rendered explicit. This mediator, I would suggest, is "nothing but"
those metaphoric, imagistic processes, dependent upon limbic-motivated right-hemispheric activity, that
help us initially formulate our stories. Figure 16: Nested Stories, Processes of Generation, and Multiple
Memory Systems helps explain the idea of this "unconscious" - the broadest span stories, which are
determined by complex social interactions, are episodic (imagistic) or even procedural (only manifested in
socially-modified behavior) in nature. There is a very narrow window of expressible "frames of reference"
- conscious stories. Just ask any young child - or unsophisticated adult - to describe the "rationale" for
their behaviors.
Every level of analysis - that is, every definable categorization system and schema for action (every
determinate story) - has been constructed, interpersonally, in the course of exploratory behavior and
communication of the strategies and results thereof. Our "natural levels of apprehension" - that is to say,
the stories that most easily or by default occupy our attention - have contents that are relatively accessible
to "consciousness" - that is, to explicit verbal/semantic formulation and communication. The "higherlevel"
stories - that cover a broader expanse of spatial-temporal territory - are increasingly complex and,
therefore, cannot be as simply formulated. Myth steps in to fill the breach.

Nested Stories, Processes of Generation, and Multiple Memory Systems


2.3. Mythological Representation: The Constituent Elements of Experience
Myth represents the world as "forum for action." The world as "forum for action" is comprised of three
eternally extant constituent elements of experience, and a "fourth" that "precedes" them. The unknown,
the knower, and the known make up the world as place of drama; the indeterminate "precosmogonic
chaos" proceeding their emergence serves as the ultimate source of all things (including the three
constituent elements of experience).
The precosmogonic chaos tends to take metaphorical form as the uroboros, the self-consuming serpent,
who represents the union of matter and spirit, and the possibility of transformation. The uroboros serves as
"primal source" of the mythological world parents (the Great Mother, nature, deity of the unknown,
creative and destructive; the Great Father, culture, deity of the familiar, tyrannical and protective) and of
their "Divine Son" (the Knower, the generative Word, the process of exploration).
The ancient Mesopotamian creation myth - the Enuma elish - provides a concrete example of the
interplay of these "personalities." This myth features four main characters, or sets of characters; Tiamat,
the feminine dragon of chaos, primordial goddess of creation (the uroboros and the Great Mother are
conflated, as is frequently the case, in this myth); Apsu, Tiamat's husband and consort; the "elder gods,"
children of Tiamat and Apsu; and Marduk, sun-deity and mythic hero. Tiamat symbolizes the great
unknown, the matrix of the world; Apsu the known, the pattern that makes regulated existence possible. The
"elder gods" symbolize the common psychological attributes of humanity (the "fragments or constituent
elements of consciousness"), and constitute a more thorough representation of the constituent elements of
the "patriarchal" known; Marduk - greatest of the secondary deities - represents the process that
eternally mediates between matrix and regulated existence.
The original union of Tiamat and Apsu brings the "elder gods" into being. These gods carelessly kill
Apsu, upon who they "unconsciously" depend. Tiamat re-appears, with a vengeance, and decides to
destroy everything she has created. Her "children" send one volunteer after another out to overpower her.
All fail. Finally, Marduk offers to do battle. He is elected as king - as the greatest of gods, as the
"determiner of destinies" - and voluntarily confronts Tiamat. He cuts her apart, and creates the cosmos
from her pieces. The Mesopotamian emperor - who ritually embodies Marduk - acts out this battle during
the festival of the New Year, when the "old world" is renewed.
The Enuma elish expresses in image and narrative the idea that the psychological function giving order
to chaos (1) "creates" the cosmos and (2) should occupy a superordinate position, in the intrapsychic and
social domains. The ideas contained in this myth are given more elaborated expression in later Egyptian
works of metaphysical speculation, which more directly address the idea of the heroic renewal of culture.
The three "constituent elements of experience" and the fourth who proceeds them can be viewed, at a
"higher level of resolution," as seven universal "characters" (who may take on any of a variety of culturespecific
identities). Myth describes the interactions of these characters. The great dragon of chaos - the
uroboros, the self-devouring serpent - might be conceptualized as pure (latent) information, before it is
parsed into the world of the familiar, the unfamiliar, and the experiencing subject. The uroboros is the stuff
of which categorical knowledge is composed, before being that knowledge; it is the primary "element" of
the world, which is decomposed into cosmos, surrounding chaos, and the exploratory process which
"separates" the two.
The bivalent Great Mother (second and third characters) is creation and destruction, simultaneously -
the source of all new things, the benevolent bearer and lover of the hero; the destructive forces of the
unknown, the source of fear itself, constantly conspiring to destroy life. The bivalent divine son (fourth and
fifth) is the sun-god, the hero who journeys to the underworld to rescue his incapacitated ancestors, the
messianic son of the virgin mother, savior of the world - and, simultaneously, his sworn adversary,
arrogant and deceitful. The bivalent Great Father (sixth and seventh) is the wise king and the tyrant,
cultural protection from the terrible forces of nature, security for the weak, and wisdom for the foolish.
Simultaneously, however, he is the force who devours his own offspring, who rules the kingdom with a
cruel and unjust hand, and who actively suppresses any sign of dissent or difference.
Terrible, chaotic forces lurk behind the "facade" of the normal world. These forces are kept at bay by
maintenance of social order. The "reign of order" is insufficient, however, because order itself becomes
80 





overbearing and deadly, if allowed unregulated or permanent expression. The actions of the hero constitute
an antidote to the deadly forces of chaos, and to the tyranny of order. The hero creates order from chaos,
and re-constructs that order, when necessary. His actions simultaneously ensure that novelty remains
tolerable and that security remains flexible.
Mephistopheles: Congratulations, before you part from me!
You know the devil, that is plain to see.
Here, take this key.
Faust: That little thing? But why?
Mephistopheles: First grasp it; it is nothing to decry.
Faust: It glows, it shines, increases in my hand!
Mephistopheles: How great its worth, you soon shall understand.
The key will smell the right place from all others:
Follow it down, it leads you to the Mothers! 198
2.3.1. Introduction
Reasonable and informed observers - at least since the time of Frazier199 - have established the widespread
spatial and temporal dispersion of cosmogonic stories, tales of heroism and deceit, rituals of initiation, and
standard imagistic representations, such as the virgin and child. These stories, tales, rituals and images
often differ in detail, and temporal ordering; sometimes, however, they are simply the same. It is possible
that this similarity might be the consequence of dissemination, from a single source, hundreds of centuries
ago. This hypothesis, however, does not explain why standard stories are remembered, once disseminated,
and transmitted down the generations, with little structural alteration. It is reasonable to presume that, over
the long run, our species "forgets" everything that is useless: we do not forget our myths, however -
indeed, much of the activity broadly deemed "cultural" is in fact the effort to ensure that such myths are
constantly represented and communicated.
Carl Jung attempted to account for the apparent universality of world-interpretation with the hypothesis
of the "collective unconscious." Jung believed that religious or mythological symbols sprung from a
universal source, whose final point of origin was biological (and heritable). His "collective unconscious"
was composed of "complexes," which he defined as heritable propensities for behavior or for classification.
The Jungian position, which is almost never understood properly, has attracted more than its share of
derision. Jung was not privy to our knowledge of the mechanisms of inheritance (a limitation necessarily
shared by all the members of his generation); the idea of "collective memories" appears impossible -
Lamarckian - from the modern perspective. Jung did not really believe that individual memories
themselves could be transmitted, however - although his writings, which are very difficult, do not always
make this clear. When he speaks formally of the collective unconscious, he is at pains to point out that it is
the possibility of categorization that is inherited, and not the contents of memory, itself. However, he
frequently writes "as if" the contents, as well, might be inherited.
The general irritation over Jung's "heritable memory" hypothesis has blinded psychologists - and not
just psychologists - to the remarkable fact that narratives do appear patterned, across diverse cultures. The
"mere" fact that all cultures use what are clearly and rapidly identifiable as "narratives" (or at least as
"rites," which are clearly dramatic in nature) in itself strongly points to an underlying commonality of
structure and purpose. It might still be objected: attempts to attribute comprehensible patterning to such
"narratives" cannot be demonstrated, without a theory of interpretation, and that theory may be merely
"reading in" patterns, where none actually "exist." The same objection can, of course, be applied - and
applied validly - to literary interpretation, the study of history, dream analysis, and anthropology. Cultural
81 






phenomena cannot be understood, except from a cultural perspective. This fundamental problem (among
others) makes verification of theories in the "domain of value" difficult.
Nonetheless - to live, it is necessary to act. Action presupposes belief and interpretation (implicit, if not
explicit). Belief has to be grounded in faith, in the final analysis (as the criteria by which a moral theory
might be evaluated have to be chosen, as well). There is no reason, however, why such faith cannot be
informed, and critically assessed. It seems reasonable to presume that cross-cultural analysis of systems of
belief, and their comparison with the essentially literary productions of the humanities, might constitute a
means to attain such information. This was Jung's approach. The "causal mechanism" he constructed to
account for what he found - that is, the "collective unconscious" - appears fundamentally untenable, from
the modern empirical perspective (although the idea is much more complex, and much less easily
dismissable, than generally conceded). This does not mean that we should dismiss his methodology, nor
deride his otherwise valuable insights. Great modern minds, working in areas outside of psychology, have
also concluded that stories have universal structures.
How can the fact of patterned stories - archetypal stories, if you will - be reconciled with the apparent
impossibility of inherited memory content? We might turn our attention to the phenomenon of language,
and the processes of its "storage" and transmission, to find an answer. The human linguistic ability appears
to have a relatively specific biological basis. Other animals do not have language, in their natural states,
and cannot be taught language, at any sophisticated level. Human children, by contrast - even when
severely intellectually impaired - pick up language easily, and use it fluently, naturally, and creatively.
Language-use is an intrinsic characteristic of Homo Sapiens, and the structure of language itself appears
biologically grounded. Nonetheless, human languages differ. A native Japanese speaker cannot understand
a native French speaker, although it might be evident to both that the other is using language. It is possible
for two phenomena to be different, at one level of analysis, and similar at another.
The question might be asked: upon what databank, so to speak, does a child draw, when he or she learns
to talk (read, write)? The child listens to those around her. She is not explicitly "taught" how to talk,
although some explicit teaching takes place. Her biological propensity encounters a cultural reality: the
existence of language, in the culture. Her parents serve as primary intermediaries of culture: they embody
language in their behavior, and transmit it to her, during their day-to-day activities. Nonetheless, they
cannot be said to be the "creators" of language, although they may use it idiosyncratically - even
creatively. It is the capability for human linguistic activity - whatever that is - that is the "creator." The
cumulative consequences of this capability, expressed over centuries, have modified the behavior of all the
individuals who compose a given linguistic "culture." Identifiable individuals serve as the temporary
"agents of embodied memory" for the entire culture, at any given locale and point in time; nonetheless, the
loss of a given individual poses no threat to the "knowledge" of the culture. This is because language is
"remembered" - that is, embodied - in the behavior of all those who speak. Children pick up language by
interacting with adults, who embody language. Thus, they learn to speak, and learn to know they have
language, and even to observe and study the fact that they have language.
The same holds true of moral behavior, and of the belief that "underlies" it. Adults embody the
behavioral wisdom of their culture for their children. Children interact with adults, who serve as "cultural
emissaries." Obviously, a given adult may be a better or worse representative - just as a parent may be
more or less literate. However, a bad example can be as exemplary as a good example; furthermore,
children are rarely limited, in their exposure, to a single "hero." If there are no other adults around in fact,
they ar+e inevitably present by proxy, in "entertainment": in ritual, drama, literature, and myth. The
behavioral patterns that make up our stories might therefore be regarded as "stored" in our (social)
behavior. This implies that such patterns may be abstracted from that behavior, at any time. The "collective
unconscious" is, from this perspective, embodied behavioral wisdom, in its most fundamental form - is the
cumulative transmitted consequences of the fact of exploration and culture on action.
Our capacity for abstraction allows us to derive the constituent elements of successful "adaptation"
itself, from observation of behavioral patterns that are constantly played out in the world as it actually
exists. The behavioral patterns that constitute adult interaction, for example, are exceedingly sophisticated -
conditioned to the last gesture by centuries of cultural work. We can extract "images" of these patterns;
such images - just as sophisticated as the behaviors they represent - constitute the building-blocks for our
stories, and for our self-understanding. (The admirable adult - an identifiable individual - keeps her house
82 












tidy and neat, reconciles her warring brothers, and learns hard lessons, when such learning is necessary.
The archetypal hero makes order out of chaos, brings peace to the world, and restructures society, when it
has become rigid and anachronistic.) The "collective unconscious" that constitutes the basis for shared
religious mythology is in fact the behavior - the procedures - that have been generated, transmitted,
imitated, and modified by everyone who has ever lived, everywhere. Images of these behaviors - and of the
transcendent "place" where they occur (the universe of chaos and order) - constitute metaphors, symbolic
images. Metaphors mediate between our procedural wisdom, and our explicit knowledge; constitute the
imagistic declarative point of transition between the act and the word.
We have spent hundreds of thousands of years watching ourselves act, and telling stories about how we
act, in consequence. A good story has a universal quality, which means that it speaks a language we all
understand. Any universally comprehensible language must have universal referents, and this means that a
good story must speak to us about those aspects of experience that we all share. But what is it that every
human being shares, regardless of place and time of birth? Is it reasonable to posit that anything might
remain constant, for example, across the centuries that separate us from our stone-age ancestors; across the
ideological and religious barriers that divide the inhabitants of our modern nations? Our distant
predecessors lived much closer to nature, and the problems that beset them seem far removed from our
current daily struggles. The great difference between us and them seems analagous in distance, if not
precisely in kind, to that obtaining between the varied cultural worlds of today - to the great gap that still
divides the Hindu religious mystic, for example, from the Manhattan investment banker. It is not surprising
that a world characterized by such different human lives might remain rife with constant intergroup conflict
- not surprising, as well, that we might seem to have outgrown our traditional wisdom. But are there
fundamental presuppositions we might agree upon - might share - in spite of our differences?
Most objects of experience have some properties in common, while varying with regards to others.
Generally, the similarities and the differences are both significant. So it is with individuals, and with
cultures. We seem peculiarly aware of our differences, however, and not of our similarities. Even groups of
people who share much in common, at least from the perspective of more distant outsiders - the Irish
Catholics and Protestants spring to mind - appear sufficiently conscious of those factors that make them
unique in their social affiliation. We are much less naturally capable of apprehending our similarities. I
think this is in part because we are not built to focus on the predictable and familiar. Our attention
gravitates naturally towards those aspects of our environments, natural and social, that contain information.
The similarities of the Serb and the Croat are hidden from each other, so to speak, by a wall of habituation
- but the differences stand out profoundly.
To ask the question "what is it that two or more discriminable beings or things or situations might
share?" is really to ask "at what levels of analysis might two or more things be considered the same? - and
at what levels different?" It is the particulars of our individuality - our specific time and place - that
differentiate us from one another. What unites us is the fact of those particulars, however - the fact that we
each have a specific time and place - and the implications of that fact for the nature of our existence. Our
lives are open to possibility, but remain eternally bounded by disease, death, and subjugation to social
structure. As mutable, limited, social beings, we are all engaged in a massive, cooperative and competitive
endeavor. We do not understand the rules that govern this endeavor, in the final analysis; cannot state
explicitly why it is that we do what we do. Our democratic constitutions, for example - which contain the
most fundamental axioms of the "body of law" that we imitate (that governs our behavior) - are
inextricably embedded in the conception of natural rights (which is to say, is embedded in a statement of
faith: "we hold these truths to be self-evident"). We are all, in consequence, imitating a story that we don't
understand. This story covers the broadest possible expanse of time and space (at least that expanse
relevant to us), and is still implicitly "contained" in our behavior (although represented, in part, in episodic
imagery and semantic description). This partially implicit containment constitutes our mythology, and our
ritual, and provides the "upper-level," "unconscious" frames of reference within which our conditional and
expressible individual stories retain their validity.
It is impossible to properly appreciate the nature of the categories of the mythological imagination
without developing some understanding of the process of categorization. The act of categorization enables
us to treat the mysterious and complex world we inhabit as if it were simpler - as if it were, in fact,
comprehensible. We perform this act of simplification by treating objects or situations that share some
83 


aspect of structure, function or implication as if they were identical. People are very good at categorizing -
so good, in fact, that the ability is taken for granted, and appears simple. It is not so simple, however.
Neither the "rules" that underly categorization, nor the act itself, have proved easy to describe. Roger
Brown, the eminent psycholinguist, states:
"Until about 1973, psychological experiments on category formation conceived of human categories on
the model of a "proper set." Triangles are a proper set, which means that members of the triangle class
are precisely definable in terms of a conjunction of attributes true of all members of the set, and of no
nonmembers. A triangle is a closed three-sided figure. From the fact that a clear definition exists, it
follows that membership in the set is not a matter of degree; one triangle is no more essentially
triangular than any other. An entity either is or is not a triangle.
In retrospect, it is amazing that psychology was for so long able to think of real-life categories as
proper sets. We ought to have worred more over the extreme difficulty everyone has in defining
anything "natural," and natural, as used here, includes not only dogs and carrots but also artifacts like
chairs, cars, and pencils. I know you can tell one when you see one, but just try listing the attributes that
are true of all dogs and of no cats or wolves or hyenas, or of all the carrots and no radishes or turnips, or
of all chairs and no small tables, hassocks, benches or slings."00
In the natural state, so to speak, human beings do not think like logicians or even like empiricists. It
takes training to think like that. In the absence of such training, we still think, however; but more
subjectively - like "unreasonable," idiosyncratically emotional beings, who inhabit bodies of particular
size, with particular and constrained properties. Our natural categories - which are the groupings we
generate spontaneously - do not consist solely of the consensually apprehensible properties shared by the
things and situations we encounter. Neither are natural categories tightly bounded - their borders are fuzzy,
and they overlap. The construction of proper sets is possible - obviously, since they exist - and the ability
to construct and use such sets has proved useful, in a broad variety of manners. Nonetheless, the capability
that underlies such construction appears relatively new, phylogenetically speaking - and seems at
dependent at least in part on the ability to think empirically and to regard things objectively. In the absence
of such ability - which requires specialized training (or, at least, immersion in a culture like ours where
such thinking has become commonplace) people naturally incline towards the development of what has
been described (recently) as the "cognitive model." Cognitive models are characterized by a number of
interesting and distinctive properties (as paraphrased, in part, from George Lakoff201):
1) They are embodied with regards to their content, which essentially means that they can be used,
without necessarily being defined; means that they are implicit in action, without necessarily being explicit
in description. Two things classified within the same cognitive model are two things that evoke the same
behavior, and can therefore be regarded, at least from the perspective of action, as one thing. If you are
utilizing a cognitive model, and someone asks you to describe its content ("What makes a dog?") you
might say, "I can't say, but I know one when I see one." You know that a dog is, for example, something
friendly, something to be petted, and something to play with - although such knowledge does not comprise
everything that makes up what you regard as dog. Most of the concepts you use are in fact embodied, at the
most basic of levels - are in fact habitual, procedural, motoric, behavioral. You can use them without
thinking. Those that are not can only be applied slowly, with full conscious attention, and with effort.
2) They are characterized by basic-level categorization and basic-level primacy. These terms mean,
respectively, that the phenomena most "naturally" apprehensible to the human mind - perceptible as a
whole, or gestalt; nameable, communicable, manipulable, memorable - serve as the material for initial
categorization, and that those initial categories provide the basis for the development of more abstract
concepts (even for the comparison point for determining what we consider "abstract"). Most "naturally
apprehensible" means learned and named first (generally with short names); means conceptualized in terms
of or at the level of "distinctive action" - in association with characteristic behaviors, such as petting for the
category "cat," and smelling for the category "flower." Our basic-level categories reflect our structure, as
much as the structure of the external world: we most accurately conceive of those things that most simply
present themselves to us. The "higher" and "lower" levels of category that surround these naturally
apprehensible basic-level phenomena might be regarded, in contrast, as "achievements of the imagination,"
84 











to use Roger Brown's phrase.202 We perceive the "cat," for example, and infer the species that contains the
cat, or the subtype that makes it Siamese. Our basic-level categories generally occupy the middle of our
conceptual hierarchies: we generalize when we move "up," and specialize, when we move "down."
3) They may be used in metonymic, or reference-point reasoning. Metonymic reasoning is symbolic, in
the psychoanalytic or literary sense. Metonymic means interchangeable, and more. The metonymic
properties of the objects in a cognitive model means that any or all of those objects can "stand for" any or
all of the others. This capacity makes sense, since all of the objects in a given category are by definition
regarded as equivalent, in some non-trivial sense (most generally, in terms of implication for action). The
human capacity for metaphor, aesthetic appreciation, and allusion seems integrally related to the capacity
for metonymic reasoning, and the use of richly meaningful cognitive models.
4) They are characterized by membership and centrality gradience. Membership gradience implies
degree of membership, which is to say that an ostrich, for example, is a bird, but perhaps not so much of a
bird as a robin - because the robin has more properties that are central to the category bird. A thing can be
a better or worse exemplar of its category; if it is worse, it can still be placed firmly within that category.
5) They contain phenomena associated as a consequence of familial resemblance, a term used first in
this context by Ludwig Wittgenstein.203 Things with familial resemblance all share similarities with a
potentially hypothetical object. The prototypical Smith brother, to use a famous example,204 may have a
dark mustache, beady eyes, balding pate, thick horn-rimmed glasses, dark beard, skinny neck, large ears,
and weak chin. Perhaps there are six Smith brothers, in total, none of whom has all the properties of the
prototypical Smith. Adam Smith has a weak chin, large ears, balding pate, and skinny neck - but no
glasses, mustache, or beard. Joseph, by contrast, has the glasses, mustache and beard - but a full head of
hear, small ears, and a normal neck. Phineas has a receding hairline, beady eyes, and a dark beard and
mustache - and so on, for George, Everett and Sam. None of the brothers precisely resembles one another -
but if you saw them in a group, you would say "those men are all brothers."
6) They give rise to the phenomena of polysemy - a defining characteristic of myth. A polysemic story is
written and can be read validly on many "levels." The phenomena of polysemy - discussed in some detail
later in this manuscript - arises when the relationship of objects within a particular cognitive model is
analogous in some sense to the relationship that obtains between cognitive models. Great works of
literature are always polysemic, in this manner: the characters within the story stand in the same
relationship to one another as things of more general significance stand to one another, in the broader
world. The struggle of Moses against the Egyptian pharaoh, for example - to take a story we will consider
later - can also be read as an allegory of the struggle of the oppressed against the oppressor or, even more
generally, as the rebellion of the [world-destroying (flooding)] savior against society.
To say that two separable things belong to the same category is a tricky business. We presume, without
thinking, that we group things as a consequence of something about them, rather than as a consequence of
something about us. What do all chairs share in common, then? Any given chair may lack some of the most
common chair attributes, such as legs, or backs, or armrests. Is a tree-stump a chair? Yes - if you can sit on
it. It isn't really something about an object, considered as an independent thing, that makes it a chair: it is,
rather, something about its potential for interaction with us. The category "chair" contains objects that serve
a function we value. Chairs may be efficiently sat upon - at least in potential. Our action in the face of an
object constitutes an elementary but fundamental form of classification (constitutes, in fact, the most
fundamental of all classifications; the classification from which all abstracted divisions are derived). The
category of "all things that make you want to run away when you look at them" might be considered, for
example, a very basic form of construct. Closely related to this category, although slightly higher on the
hierarchy of abstraction, might be the category of "all objects to be feared," or "all objects that are
dangerous when approached in one fashion, but beneficial when approached in another."
It is a meaningful but "irrational" classification scheme of this sort that Jung described as a complex -
one of the "constituent elements" of the "collective unconscious": a group of phenomena, linked together
because of shared significance [which is (essentially) implication for action, or emotional equivalence].
Jung believed that many complexes had an archetypal (or universal) basis, rooted in biology, and that this
rooting had something specifically to do with memory. It appears that the truth is somewhat more
complicated. We classify things according to the way they appear, the way they act, and in accordance with
their significance to us, which is an indication of how to act in their presence - and may mix any or all of
85 





these attributes, irrationally (but meaningfully), in a single scheme. We categorize diverse things in similar
manners, across cultures, because we share structure of memory, and physical form, manifested in
observable behavior; because we share perceptual apparatus, and motivational drive, and emotional state.
The imagination has its natural categories, dependent for their existence on the interaction between our
embodied minds and the world of shared experience; into these categories fall particular phenomena, in a
more-or-less predictable manner. Stories describe the interactions of the contents of the categories of the
imagination, which take embodied form, in the shape of dramatic characters. The characters have a
predictable nature, and play out their relationships in an eternally fascinating patterned fashion, time and
time again, everywhere in the world.
So: now we have the observation of commonality of structure, and a plausible theory to account for the
presence of that commonality. Perhaps it would be reasonable, then, to describe the nature of the universal
patterns in narrative - while placing a variety of additional and stringent constraints on that description, for
the sake of caution (given the difficulty of verifying "interpretive theories.") First, let us make the
description rationally acceptable, and internally consistent - that is, let us find a way of making sense of
myth that does not conflict with the tenets of empiricism and experimental science, and that appears
applicable to stories derived from many different places, and many different times. Let us further make the
description simple, as a good theory should be simple - so that remembering the interpretive framework is
much easier than remembering the stories themselves. Let us make it compelling, as well, from the
emotional perspective. Good theories have an affective component, sometimes described as "beauty." This
"beauty" appears simultaneously as efficiency - the same sort of efficiency that characterizes a well-crafted
tool - and as what might be described as a "window into possibility." A good theory lets you use things -
things that once appeared useless - for desirable ends. In consequence, such a theory has a general sense of
excitement and hope about it. A good theory about the structure of myth should let you see how a story you
couldn't even understand previously might shed new and useful light on the meaning of your life. Finally,
let us constrain the description by making it fit with what is known about the manner in which the brain
actually operates (and which was described previously); let us insure that the world of myth, as interpreted,
is the same "world" apperceived by the mind.
Operation within this set of constraints allows for generation of the following straightforward
hypothesis: the "partially implicit" mythic stories or fantasies that guide our adaptation, in general, appear
to describe or portray or embody the three permanent constituent elements of human experience: the
unknown, or unexplored territory; the known, or explored territory; and the process - the knower - which
mediates between them. These three "elements" constitute the cosmos - that is, the world of experience -
from the narrative or mythological perspective.
No matter where an individual lives - and no matter when - he is faced with the same set of problems,
or, perhaps, the same set of metaproblems, since the details differ endlessly. He is a cultural creature, and
must come to terms with the existence of that culture. He must master the domain of the known - explored
territory - which is the set of interpretations and behavioral schemas he shares with his societal
compatriots. He must understand his role within that culture - a role defined by the necessity of
preservation, maintenance, and transmission of tradition, as well as revolution and radical update of that
tradition, when such update becomes necessary. He must in addition be able to tolerate and even benefit
from the existence of the transcendental unknown - unexplored territory - which is that aspect of
experience which cannot be addressed with mere application of memorized and habitual procedures; is that
part of the human "environment" which demands active, voluntary and courageous investigation. Finally,
he must adapt to the presence of himself - must face the endlessly tragic problem of the knower, the
exploratory process, the limited, mortal subject; must serve as eternal mediator between the creative and
destructive "underworld" of the unknown and the secure, oppressive patriarchal kingdom of human culture.
We cannot see the unknown, because we are protected from it by everything familiar and unquestioned.
We are in addition habituated to what is familiar and known - by definition - and are therefore often
unable to apprehend its structure (often even unable to perceive that it is there). Finally, we remain ignorant
of our own true nature, because of its intrinsic complexity, and because we act towards others and ourselves
in a socialized manner, which is to say a predictable manner - and thereby shield ourselves from our own
mystery. The figures of myth, however, embody the world - "visible" and "invisible." Though the analysis
of such figures, we can come to see just what meaning means, and how it reveals itself, in relationship to
86 




our actions. It is through such analysis that we can come to realize the potential breadth and depth of our
own emotions, and the nature of our true being; to understand our capacity for great acts of evil - and great
acts of good - and our motivations for participating in them.
Consider - once again - this archaic creation myth from Sumer:
"So far, no cosmogonic text properly speaking has been discovered, but some allusions permit us to
reconstruct the decisive moments of creation, as the Sumerians conceived it. The goddess Nammu
(whose name is written with the pictograph representing the primordial sea) is presented as "the mother
who gave birth to the Sky and the Earth" and the "ancestress who brought forth all the gods." The theme
of the primordial waters, imagined as a totality at once cosmic and divine, is quite frequent in archaic
cosmogonies. In this case too, the watery mass is identified with the original Mother, who, by
parthenogenesis, gave birth to the first couple, the Sky (An) and the Earth (Ki), incarnating the male and
female principles. This first couple was united, to the point of merging, in the hieros gamos [mystical
marriage]. From their union was born En-lil, the god of the atmosphere. Another fragment informs us
that the latter separated his parents.... The cosmogonic theme of the separation of sky and earth is also
widely disseminated."05
The "sky" and "earth" of the Sumerians are categories of apprehension, characteristic of the Sumerian
culture, and must not be confused with the "sky" and "earth" of modern empirical thinking. "An" and "Ki"
are, instead, the dramatically-represented Great Father and Great Mother of all things (including the "son"
who gives "birth" to them). This somewhat paradoxical narrative is prototypical; mythologies of creation
tend to manifest themselves in this pattern. In the Enuma elish, for example - the oldest written creation
myth we possess - the Mesopotamian hero/deity Marduk faces the aquatic female dragon Tiamat (mother
of all things, including Marduk himself), cuts her up, and creates the world from her pieces.206 The god
Marduk serves explicitly as exemplar for the Mesopotamian emperor,207 whose job is to ensure that the
cosmos exists and remains stable, as a consequence of his proper "moral" behavior, defined by his
"imitation" of Marduk. In the Judeo-Christian tradition, it is the Logos 208 - the word of God - that creates
order from chaos - and it is in the image of the Logos that man ["Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness" (Genesis 1:26)] is created. This idea has clear additional precedents in early and late Egyptian
cosmology (as we shall see). In the Far East - similarly - the cosmos is imagined as composed of the
interplay between yang and yin, chaos and order209 - that is to say, unknown or unexplored territory, and
known or explored territory. Tao, from the Eastern perspective, is the pattern of behavior that mediates
between them (analogous to En-lil, Marduk, and the Logos) - that constantly generates, and regenerates,
the "universe." For the Eastern man, life in Tao is the highest good, the "way" and "meaning"; the goal
towards which all other goals must remain subordinate.
Our narratives describe the world as it possesses broad but classifiable implication for motor output - as
it signifies. We gather information about the nature of the world, as it signifies for behavior, by watching
ourselves - and the others that compose our social groups - act in the world. We derive conclusions about
the fundamental meanings of things by observing how we respond to them. The unknown becomes
classifiable, in this manner, because we respond to its manifestation predictably. It compels our actions,
and "makes" us feel. It frightens us into paralysis and entices us forward, simultaneously; it ignites our
curiosity, and heightens our senses - it offers us new information and greater well-being, at the potential
cost of our lives. We observe our responses, which are biologically predetermined, and draw the
appropriate conclusions. The unknown is intrinsically interesting, in a manner that poses an endless
dilemma. It promises and threatens simultaneously. It appears as the hypothetical ultimate "source" of all
determinate information, and as the ultimate unity of all currently discriminable things. It surrounds all
things, eternally; engenders all things, and takes all things back. It can therefore be said, paradoxically, that
we know specific things about the domain of the unknown - that we understand something about it, that we
can act toward and represent it, even though it has not yet been explored. This paradoxical ability is a
nontrivial capacity. Since the unknown constitutes an ineradicable component of the "environment," so to
speak, we have to know what it is, what it signifies; have to understand its implication for behavior and its
affective valence.
87 








Explored territory is something altogether different. Habitual and familiar actions are useful there,
instead of the frightened, tentative or exploratory behaviors that serve where nothing is certain. Habits and
familiar actions exist, as a general rule, because they have been successful, because their implementation
suffices to transform what would otherwise be unexplored territory into a safe and fruitful haven. As we
have been at pains to demonstrate, the unknown does not lose its a priori motivational significance -
promise and threat - because of the passive process of "habituation." Adaptation is always active.
"Habituation," except in the most trivial of senses, is the consequence of successful creative exploration,
which means generation of behavioral patterns that turn the indeterminate meaning of something newly
encountered into something positive, at best - neutral, at worst. Is fire dangerous, or beneficial? It depends
on how it is approached - which is to say, fire has context-dependent potential for harm and for benefit.
Which of its many "potentials" fire actually manifests depends on what behavioral strategy is undertaken in
its presence. Fire heats our homes. Now and then - when we are insufficiently conscious - it burns one of
them down. What fire does - which is to say, what it is, from the perspective of motivational significance -
depends on how we treat it.
We have lost our fear of fire, not because we have habituated to it, but because we have learned how to
control it - because we have learned to specify and limit its "intrinsically" ambivalent affective valence,
through modification of our own behavior, in its presence. Fire, insofar as we can control it, has been
rendered predictable, non-threatening - even familiar, and comforting. All things we can control (which
means, can bend to our own ends) have been likewise rendered predictable - by definition. The "territory"
of "explored territory" is therefore defined, at least in general, by security. Secure territory is that place
where we know how to act. "Knowing how to act" means "being sure that our actions, undertaken in the
comprehend context of the present, will produce the results desired in the future." The affective
significance of the phenomena that comprise "explored territory" have been mapped. This map takes the
form of the story, which describes the valence of present occurrences, the form of the desired future, and
the means that might serve usefully to transform the former into the latter. Any territories our stories serve
to render beneficial constitute "home ground."
Home ground - explored territory - is that place where unfamiliar things do not exist. Many of the
"things" we encounter, however - perhaps most - are other people. This means that "explored territory" is
also that place where unfamiliar behaviors are not encountered. On familiar ground, we engage in those
activities that are habitual, alongside others, who are doing the same thing (who are pursuing the same
goals, whose emotions can be understood, whose beliefs are the same as ours, whose actions are
predictable). Much of what we know how to do is behavior matched to society - is individual action
matched to, adapted to, modified by, the cumulative behavior of the others who surround us. "Explored"
necessarily means, therefore, "where human activity has been rendered predictable," as well as "where the
course of 'natural' events can be accurately determined." The maps that make territory familiar
consequently consist in large part of representations of behavior - personal behavior, which we manifest,
and the behavior of others, which we constantly encounter, and to which we have adjusted our personal
actions. Likewise, we map our own behaviors, and those of others - because such behaviors comprise a
large part of the world. We do not always understand what we do, however - our actions cannot be said to
be explicitly comprehended. Our behavioral patterns are exceedingly complex, and psychology is a young
science. The scope of our behavioral wisdom exceeds the breadth of our explicit interpretation. We act, and
teach, and yet - do not understand. How can it be, that we can do what we cannot explain?
We have already seen that we can represent what we do not understand - that we derive knowledge
about the nature of the unknown (about the fact that it is eternally frightening and promising), by watching
how we behave in its presence. We do something similar, with regards to the social world, and the
behaviors that compose it. We watch how others act, and imitate, and learn to act, in consequence;
furthermore, we learn to represent the social world - which is explored territory, in large part - by
watching the actions that take place in it; by exploring the social world itself. These representations are first
patterns of actions, then stories - once the nature of the behavioral patterns have been identified, and
represented in a declarative manner. A good story portrays a behavioral pattern with a large "expanse" of
valid territory. It follows, therefore, that the greatest of all stories portrays the pattern of behavior with the
widest conceivable territory.
88 




We imitate and map adaptive behaviors - behaviors that efficiently reach a desired end - so that we can
transform the mysterious unknown into the desirable and predictable; so that the social and non-social
aspects of our experience remain under our control. The particular behaviors we imitate and represent,
organized into a coherent unit, shared with others, constitute our cultures; constitute the manner in which
we bring order to our existence. Our maps of adaptive behavior contain descriptions of the world in which
that behavior is manifested - contains descriptions of explored and unexplored territory - as well as
representations of the behaviors themselves. The stories mankind tells about the past, personal and
historical, constitute expressions of the content of the declarative memory system, which is the system that
knows what. Stories are generally told about animate objects, motivated, emotional beings, and might be
regarded as descriptions of behavior, including antecedents, consequences, and contexts. Stories contain
portrayals of the outputs of the procedural system - which is the system that knows how - and inferences
(explicit and implicit) about the existence and nature of factors (implicit, nonverbal, nondeclarative
"presuppositions"), motivational and emotional, that guide and govern such output. The knowing what
system therefore contains a complex sociohistorically-constructed (but still somewhat "unconscious")
verbal and imaginative description of the actions of the knowing how system. This description takes
narrative form. Capacity for such representation emerges as the consequence of a complex and lengthy
process of development, originating in action, culminating in production of capacity for abstract cognition.
The episodic system, which generates representations of the experiential world, contains an elaborate
model of the phenomenological world, composed in large part of encountered human behaviors, generated
by the other and the self - the most complex and affectively relevant phenomena in the human field of
experience. This representation takes imaginative, dramatic, then narrative, mythic form, as the model is
constructed in fantasy, then described by the semantic system. Narrative/mythic "reality" is the world,
conceived of in imagination, comprising imagistic representation of the behavioral pattern central to
"morality," played out in an environment permanently characterized by the interplay of the known and the
unknown. This "reality" is the world as place of action, and not as "place of objective things."
"All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women merely players:
They have their exits and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts."10
Before the emergence of empirical methodology - which allowed for methodical separation of subject
and object in description - the world-model contained abstracted inferences about the nature of existence,
derived primarily from observations of human behavior. This means, in essence, that pre-experimental man
observed "morality" in his behavior and inferred (through the process described previously) the existence
of a source for that morality in the structure of the "universe" itself. Of course, this "universe" is the
experiential field - affect, imagination and all - and not the "objective" world constructed by the postempirical
mind. This prescientific "model of reality" primarily consisted of narrative representations of
behavioral patterns (and of the contexts that surround them), and was concerned primarily with the
motivational significance of events and processes. As this model became more abstract - as the semantic
system analyzed the information presented in narrative format, but not "understood" - man generated
imaginative "hypotheses" about the nature of the "ideal" human behavior, in the "archetypal" environment.
This archetypal environment was (is) composed of three domains, which easily become three "characters":
The unknown is unexplored territory, nature, the unconscious, dionysian force, the id, the Great Mother
goddess, the queen, the matrix, the matriarch, the container, the object to be fertilized, the source of all
things, the strange, the unconscious, the sensual, the foreigner, the place of return and rest, the maw of the
earth, the belly of the beast, the dragon, the evil stepmother, the deep, the fecund, the pregnant, the valley,
the cleft, the cave, hell, death and the grave, the moon (ruler of the night and the myterious dark),
uncontrollable emotion, matter, and the earth.211 Any story that makes allusion to any of these phenomena
instantly involves all of them. The grave and the cave, for example, connote the destructive aspect of the
maternal - pain, grief and loss, deep water, and the dark woods; the fountain in the forest (water and woods
in their alternative aspect), by contrast, brings to mind sanctuary, peace, rebirth, and replenishment.
The knower is the creative explorer, the ego, the I, the eye, the phallus, the plow, the subject,
consciousness, the illuminated or enlightened one, the trickster, the fool, the hero, the coward; spirit (as
89 





opposed to matter, as opposed to dogma); the sun, son of the unknown and the known (son of the Great
Mother and the Great Father).212 The central character in a story must play the role of hero, or deceiver;
must represent the sun (or, alternatively, the adversary - the power that eternally opposes the "dominion of
the light").
The known is explored territory, culture, appollinian control, superego, the conscience, the rational, the
king, the patriarch, the wise old man and the tyrant, the giant, the ogre, the cyclops, order and authority and
the crushing weight of tradition, dogma, the day sky, the countryman, the island, the heights, the ancestral
spirits, and the activity of the dead.213 Authority and its danger play central roles in interesting tales,
because human society is hierarchical, and because the organized social world is omnipresent. Authority
and power manifest themselves, implicitly or explicitly, in all human relationships; we cannot live - have
never lived - without others. The fact of power relationships and authority constitutes an eternally
challenging and necessary constant of the human domain of experience.
The unknown is yang, cold, dark and feminine; the known yin, warm, bright and masculine; the knower
is the man living in Tao, on the razor's edge, on the straight and narrow path, on the proper road, in
meaning, in the kingdom of heaven, on the mountaintop, crucified on the branches of the world-tree - is the
individual who voluntarily carves out the space between nature and culture. The interpretation of words in
relationship to these prototypes (unknown, knower, known) is complicated by the fact of shifting meaning:
earth, for example, is unknown (feminine) in relationship to sky, but known (masculine) in relationship to
water; dragon is feminine, masculine and subject simultaneously. This capacity for meanings to shift is not
illogical, it is just not "proper."14 Meaning transforms itself endlessly with shift in interpretive context - is
determined in part by that context (that frame of reference, that story). The same word in two sentences -
one ironical, for example, the other straightforward - can have two entirely different, even opposite,
meanings. Likewise, the sentence taken out of the context of the paragraph may be interpreted in some
fashion entirely foreign to the intent of the author. Admission of the property of context-dependent
meaning is neither illogical, nor indicative of sloppy reasoning, nor primitive - merely recognition that
context determines significance. The fact of context-dependence, however, makes interpretation of a given
symbol difficult - particularly when it has been removed from its culturally-constructed surroundings or
milieu.
The unknown, the known and the knower share between them tremendous affective bivalence: the
domain of nature, the Great Mother, contains everything creative and destructive, because creation and
destruction are integrally linked. The old must die, must be destroyed, to give way to the new; the
mysterious source of all things (that is, the unknown) is also their final destination. Likewise, the domain of
culture, the Great Father, is simultaneously and unceasingly tyranny and order, because security of person
and property is always obtained at the cost of absolute freedom. The eternal subject, man, the knower, is
equally at odds: the little god of earth is also mortal worm, courageous and craven, heroic and deceitful,
possessed of great and dangerous potential, knowing good and evil. The unknown cannot be described, by
definition. The known is too complicated to be understood. The knower - the conscious individual human
being - likewise defies his own capacity for understanding. The interplay between these ultimately
incomprehensible "forces" nonetheless constitutes the world in which we act, to which we must adapt. We
have configured our behavior, accordingly; the natural categories215 we use to apprehend the world reflect
that configuration.
"The Tao existed before its name,
and from its name, the opposites evolved,
giving rise to three divisions,
and then to names abundant.
These things embrace receptively,
achieving inner harmony,
and by their unity create
the inner world of man."16
The mythological world - which is the world as drama, story, forum for action - appears to be
composed of three constituent elements, and a "fourth" that precedes, follows and surrounds those three.
These elements, in what is perhaps their most fundamental pattern of inter-relationship, are portrayed in
90 


The Constituent Elements of Experience. This figure might be conceptualized as three disks,
stacked one on top of another, "resting" on an amorphous background. That background - chaos, the
ultimate source and destination-place of all things - envelops the "world," and comprises everything that is
now separate and identifiable: subject and object; past, present and future; "conscious," and "unconscious";
matter and spirit. The Great Mother and Father - the world parents (unexplored and explored territory,
respectively; nature and culture) - can be usefully regarded as the primordial "offspring" of primeval
chaos. The Great Mother - the unknown, as it manifests itself in experience - is the feminine deity who
gives birth to and devours all. She is the unpredictable as it is encountered, and is therefore characterized,
simultaneously, by extreme positive and extreme negative valence. The Great Father is order, placed
against chaos; civilization erected against nature, with nature's aid. He is the benevolent force that protects
individuals from catastrophic encounter with what is not yet understood; is the walls that surrounded the
maturing Buddha and that encapsulated the Hebrew Eden. Conversely, however, the Great Father is the
tyrant who forbids the emergence (or even the hypothetical existence) of anything new. The Archetypal
Son is the child of order and chaos - of culture and nature - and is therefore clearly their product.
Paradoxically, however - as the deity who separates the earth (mother) from the sky (father), he is also the
process that gives rise to his "parents." This paradoxical situation arises because the existence of defined
order, and the unexplored territory defined in opposition to that order, can only come into being in the light
of consciousness, which is the faculty that knows (and does not know). The Archetypal Son, like his
"parents," has a positive aspect, and a negative aspect. The positive aspect continually reconstructs defined
territory, as a consequence of the "assimilation" of the unknown [as a consequence of "incestuous" (that is,
"sexual" - read creative) union with the Great Mother]. The negative aspect rejects or destroys anything it
does not or will not understand.
The Constituent Elements of Experience



Figure 18: The Positive Constituent Elements of Experience, Personified 217 portrays the "Vierge
Ouvrante," a fifteenth century French sculpture, which represents the "constituent elements of the world" in
personified, and solely positive form. Personification of this sort is the rule; categorical exclusion or
inclusion in accordance with valence (all "bad" elements; all "good" elements) is almost equally common.
All positive things are, after all, reasonably apprehended as similar, or identical - likewise, all negative
things. It is for this reason, in part, that the terror of the unknown, the tyranny of the state, and the evil
aspect of man are "contaminated" with one another - for this reason that the devil and the stranger are
easily perceived as one. The "Vierge Ouvrante" is a strange work, from the standard Christian perspective,
as it portrays Mary, the "mother of God," as superordinate to God the Father and Christ the son. That
superordinate position is perfectly valid, however, from the more general mythological perspective
(although not exclusively valid). Each "constituent element of experience" can be regarded as progenitor, or
as offspring, with regard to any other (as the world parents give birth to the divine son; as the divine son
separates the world parents; as order is a derivative of chaos; as chaos is defined by order). So the most
familiar Christian "sequence of generation" (which might be God ? Mary ? Christ) is only one of many
"valid" configurations (and is not even the only one that characterizes Christianity).
Figure 18: The Positive Constituent Elements of Experience, Personified

92 






The world of experience, in total, is composed of the known - explored territory - in paradoxical
juxtaposition with the unknown - unexplored territory. Archaic notions of "reality" presuppose that the
familiar world is a sacred space, surrounded by chaos (populated, variously, by demons, reptiles, spirits and
barbarians - none of whom are really distinguishable). The world of order and chaos might be regarded as
the stage, for man - for the twin aspects of man, more accurately: for the aspect that inquires, and explores
(which voluntarily expands the domain and structure of order, culture) and for the aspect that opposes that
inquiry, exploration and transformation. The great story is, therefore, good vs. evil, played out against the
endless flux of being, as it signifies. The forces of "good" have an eternal character (in the same way that
Platonic objects are represented, eternally, in supracelestial space); unfortunately, so do the forces of evil.
This eternality exists because all members of the species Homo Sapiens are essentially equivalent, equal
before God: we find ourselves vulnerable, mortal creatures, thrown into a universe bent on our creation and
protection - and our transformation and destruction. Our "attitude" towards this ambivalent universe can
only take one of two prototypical forms: positive or negative. The precise nature of these two forms (which
can only be regarded as complex "personalities") - and of the background against which they work -
constitutes the central subject matter of myth (and, dare it be said, the proper subject matter of the
humanities and fine arts).
Analysis of a series of myths - the series which, I would argue, underlies Western civilization itself -
should make these points painfully self-evident. We will begin with a discussion of the Enuma elish. This
Mesopotamian creation story, which was elaborated in detail and complexity over the course of numerous
centuries, is the most ancient complete cosmogonic myth at our disposal. We turn from the Sumerians, to
ancient Egyptian cosmology; then, from these specific examples to a more general discussion of
mythological representation.
2.3.2. The Enuma elish: A Comprehensive Exemplar of Narrative Categorization
Creation myths are generally considered primitive or superstitious attempts to perform the magic of modern
science. We assume that our ancestors were trying to do the same thing we do when we construct our
cosmological theories, and describe the generation of the objective world. This presumption is wrong. Our
ancestors were not as simple-minded as we think they were, and their theories of the generation of the
cosmos were not merely primitive science. Archaic theories of creation attempted to account for the
existence of the world, as experienced in totality (which means, including meaning), and not for the
isolated fact of the material world. The world as experienced in totality is made up of the material things
we are familiar with, and the valences we consider epiphenomenal; of the objects of experience, and the
fact of the subject, who does the experiencing. The world brought into being in archaic myths of creation is
phenomenological, rather than material - includes all aspects of experience, including those things we now
regard as purely subjective. The archaic mind had not yet learned how to forget what was important.
Ancient stories of the generation of the world therefore focus on all of reality, rather than on those distant
and abstracted aspects we regard as purely objective.
Science might be considered "description of the world with regards to those aspects that are
consensually apprehensible" or "specification of the most effective mode of reaching an end (given a
defined end)." Narrative - myth, most fundamentally - can be more accurately regarded as "description of
the world as it signifies (for action)." The mythic universe is a place to act, not a place to perceive. Myth
therefore describes things in terms of their unique or shared affective valence, their value, their
motivational significance. If we can tell (or act out) a story about something, we can be said to have
mapped that thing, at least in part. We tell stories about the unknown, and the knower, and the known, and
can therefore be said, somewhat paradoxically, to have adapted to the unpredictable, to the fact that we can
adapt to the unpredictable - and to explored territory itself, where everything has been rendered secure.
Although the unknown is truly unknown, it can be regarded as possessed of stable characteristics, in a
broad sense. These characteristics are revealed in the actions we undertake in response to the appearance
of unexpected things.
The world as experienced is composed of all the things we are familiar with, and have classified in
accordance with their relevance, and all the things we are unfamiliar with, which have a relevance all of
93 



their own, and of the process that mediates between the two, which turns the unfamiliar into the familiar
and, sometimes, makes the predictable strange. The domain of the unfamiliar might be considered the
ultimate source of all things, since we generate all of our determinate knowledge as a consequence of
exploring what we do not understand. Equally, however, the process of exploration must be regarded as
seminal, since nothing familiar can be generated from the unpredictable in the absence of exploratory
action and conception. The domain of the known - created in the process of exploration - is the familiar
world, firm ground, separated from the maternal sea of chaos. These three domains comprise the
fundamental building blocks of the archaic world of myth. We briefly discussed an archaic Sumerian
creation myth, previously, describing the "world" as the consequence of the separation of the cosmic
parents, An (Sky) from Ki (Earth) by En-lil, their son and god of the atmosphere. The ancient Egyptians
regarded the situation similarly:
"Like so many other traditions, the Egyptian cosmogony begins with the emergence of a mound in the
primordial waters. The appearance of this "First Place" above the aquatic immensity signifies the
emergence of the earth, but also the beginning of light, life, and consciousness. At Heliopolis, the place
named the "Hill of Sand," which formed part of the temple of the sun, was identified with the primordial
hill. Hermopolis was famous for its lake, from which the cosmogonic lotus emerged. But other localities
took advantage of the same privilege. Indeed, each city, each sanctuary, was considered to be a "center
of the world," the place where the Creation had begun. The initial mound sometimes became the cosmic
mountain up which the pharaoh climbed to meet the sun god.
Other versions tell of the primordial egg, which contained the "Bird of Light"..., or of the original
lotus that bore the Child Sun, or, finally, of the primitive serpent, first and last image of the god Atum.
(And in fact chapter 175 of the Book of the Dead prophesies that when the world returns to the state of
chaos, Atum will become the new serpent. In Atum we may recognize the supreme and hidden God,
whereas Re, the Sun, is above all the manifest God....) The stages of creation - cosmogony, theogony,
creation of living beings, etc. - are variously presented. According to the solar theology of Heliopolis, a
city situated at the apex of the Delta, the god Re-Atum-Khepri [three forms of the sun, noontime,
setting, and rising, respectively] created a first divine couple, Shu (the Atmosphere) and Tefnut, who
became parents of the god Geb (the Earth) and of the goddess Nut (the Sky). The demiurge performed
the act of creation by masturbating himself or by spitting. The expressions are naively coarse, but their
meaning is clear: the divinities are born from the very substance of the supreme god. Just as in the
Sumerian tradition, Sky and Earth were united in an uninterrupted hieros gamos until the moment when
they were separated by Shu, the god of the atmosphere [in other similar traditions, Ptah]. From their
union were born Osiris and Isis, Seth and Nephthys [who will be discussed later]."18
Primordial myths of creation tend to portray the origin of things as the consequence of one or more of
two related events. The universe was symbolically born into being, for example, as a result of the action of
a primeval hermaphroditic deity. Alternatively, it arose from the interaction of somewhat more
differentiated masculine and feminine spirits or principles (often the offspring of the most primordial god)
- emerged, for example, from the interplay of the sky, associated (most frequently) with the father, and the
earth (generally but not invariably granted a female character). Imagery of the latter sort remains latently
embedded in the oldest (Jahwist) creation myth in the familiar Old Testament book of Genesis. The Jahwist
story begins in the fourth stanza of the second chapter of Genesis, and describes the masculine God
breathing life (spirit) into the adamah, mother earth, thereby creating the original (hermaphroditic) man,
Adam.219 In alternative, more actively dramatic accounts - such as that of the Enuma elish, the Babylonian
creation myth - the creative demiurge slays a dragon, or a serpent, and constructs the universe out of the
body parts. The two forms of story, very different on the surface, share deep grammatical structure, so to
speak; utilize metaphors that are closely associated, psychologically and historically, to drive their
fundamental message home:
"In the Babylonian creation hymn Enuma elish [("when above"20), circa 650 B.C., in its only extant
form; derived from a tradition at least two thousand years older] the god of the fresh-water sea, Apsu,
was killed and his widow Tiamat, goddess of the "bitter" or salt waters, threatened the gods with
destruction. Marduk, the champion of the gods, killed her and split her in two, creating heaven out of
94 




one half and earth out of the other. Similarly, the creation in Genesis begins with a "firmament"
separating the waters above from the waters below, but succeeding a world that was waste (tohu) and
void, with darkness on the face of the deep (tehom). The Hebrew words are said to be etymologically
cognate with Tiamat, and there are many other allusions in the Old Testament to the creation as a killing
of a dragon or monster...."21
It is easy, or, at least appears easy, to understand why the pre-experimental mind might frequently have
associated the creation of everything with femininity - with the source of new life through birth (most
evidently, the cause and concrete origin of all living things). The role of the male in the original creation -
the part played by the "masculine principle," more precisely - is comparatively difficult to comprehend,
just as the male role in procreation is more subtle. Nonetheless, the most widely disseminated of creation
myths - and, arguably, the most potent and influential - essentially reverses the standard pattern of mythic
origin, and places particular emphasis on the masculine element. In the Judeo-Christian tradition, creation
depends on the existence and action of Logos, mythically masculine discriminant consciousness or
exploratory spirit, associated inextricably with linguistic ability - with the Word, as St. John states (in what
was perhaps designed to form the opening statement of the New Testament, structurally paralleled with the
beginning of Genesis222):
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and without him was not any
thing made that was made.
In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness
comprehended it not. (John 1:1-4).
The explicit stress placed by the Judeo-Christian tradition on the primacy of the word and its metaphorical
equivalents makes it somewhat unique in the pantheon of creation myths. The early Jews were perhaps the
first to clearly posit that activity in the mythically masculine domain of spirit was linked in some integral
manner to the construction and establishment of experience as such. It is impossible to understand why the
Judeo-Christian tradition has had such immense power - or to comprehend the nature of the relationship
between the psyche and the world - without analyzing the network of meaning that makes up the doctrine
of the Word.
There exists clear psychological precedent for the philosophy of the early Jews (and the later Christians)
in the Mesopotamian and Egyptian schools of metaphysical speculation - in their rituals, images and acts of
abstract verbal representation. The Mesopotamian creation myth, which we will consider first - the Enuma
elish - portrays the emergence of the earliest world as the consequence of the (sexual, generative, creative)
union of the primal deities Apsu and Tiamat. Apsu, masculine, served as the begetter of heaven and earth,
prior to their identification as such (before they were named). Tiamat, "she who gave birth to them all,"23
served as his consort. Initially, Apsu and Tiamat existed (?) indistinguishably from one another, "still
mingled their waters together,"24 when "no pasture land had been formed, and not even a reed marsh was
to be seen; when none of the other gods had been brought into being, when they had not yet been called by
their name, and their destinies had not yet been fixed...."25 Their uroboric union served as the source from
which more differentiated but still fundamental structures and processes or spirits issued: "at that time,
were the gods created with them."26 The "precosmogonic egg" "inhabited" by Tiamat and Apsu gave rise
to the initial "world of gods." This process is portrayed schematically in Figure 19: The Birth of the World
of Gods.
The Birth of the World of Gods.
The Mesopotamian gods - like deities everywhere - present somewhat of a mystery to the modern mind.
Archaic cultures are rife with deities. We seem unable to locate them now. They do not seem part of the
objective external world. It is tempting, therefore, to regard such beings as imaginative constructions - as
personifications of subjective affective or emotional states or drives; as the incarnated form of subjective
experience. The term "personification," however, implies a voluntary act - connotes the conscious use of
metaphor, on the part of the individual driven to represent and knowing that he is representing. There is no
indication, however, that it is an act of conscious creation that gives rise to the pre-experimental deity; in
fact, in fact, the opposite appears more true: it is the action of the deity that gives rise to creative endeavor,
as such, on the part of the creating subject. The god must therefore be more than the subject; more than the
subject's original narrative conception of himself.
The phenomena that we would now describe as emotions or motive forces, from the perspective of our
modern, comparatively differentiated and acute self-consciousness, do not appear to have been experienced
precisely as "internal" in their original form. Rather, they made their appearance as part and parcel of the
experience (the event, or sequence of events) that gave rise to them, and adopted initial representational
form in imaginative embodiment. The modern idea of the "stimulus" might be regarded as a vestigial
remnant of this form of thinking - a form which grants the power of affective and behavioral control to the
object (or which cannot distinguish between that which elicits a response, and the response itself). We no
longer think "animistically," as adults, except in our weaker or more playful moments, because we attribute
motivation and emotion to our own agency, and not (generally) to the stimulus which gives proximal rise to
them. We can separate the thing from the implication of the thing, because we are students and
beneficiaries of empirical thinking and experimental method. We can remove attribution of motive and
96 

affective power from the "object," and leave it standing in its purely sensory and consensual aspect; can
distinguish between what is us and what is world. The pre-experimental mind could not (can not) do this, at
least not consistently; could not reliably discriminate between the object and its effect on behavior. It is that
object and effect which, in totality, comprise a god (more accurately, it is a class of objects and their effects
that comprise a god).
A god, so considered - more specifically, a potent and powerful god; one with a history - constitutes the
manner in which a group or family of stimuli of isomorphic motivational significance reveals itself to or
grips the collective (communicated) imagination of a given culture. Such a representation is a peculiar mix
(from the later, empirical viewpoint) of psychological and sociological phenomena and objective "fact" -
an undifferentiated mix of subject and object (of emotion and sensory experience), transpersonal in nature
(as it is historically-elaborated "construction" and shared imaginative experience). The primitive deity
nonetheless serves as accurate representation of the ground of being, however, because it is affect and
subjectivity as well as pure object (before the two are properly distilled or separated) - because it is
primordial experience, rather than the mere primordial thing.
The original "children of Tiamat and Apsu" - the "elder gods" - should therefore be regarded as
embodiments of the archaic transpersonal "intrapsychic" phenomena that give rise to human motivation, as
well as those "aspects of the objective world" that activate those intrapsychic systems. The Sumerians
considered themselves destined to "clothe and feed" such gods, because they viewed themselves as the
"servants," in a sense, of what we would call instinctive forces, "elicited" by the "environment." Such
forces can be reasonably regarded as the Sumerians regarded them - as deities inhabiting a "supracelestial
place," extant prior to the dawn of humanity. Erotic attraction, for example - a powerful god - has a
developmental history that predates the emergence of humanity, is associated with relatively "innate"
releasing "stimuli" (those that characterize erotic beauty), is of terrible power, and has an existence
"transcending" that of any individual who is currently "possessed." Pan, the Greek god of nature,
produced/represented fear (produced "panic"); Ares or the Roman Mars, war-like fury and aggression. We
no longer personify such "instincts," except for the purposes of literary embellishment, so we don't think of
them "existing" in a "place" (like heaven, for example). But the idea that such instincts inhabit a space -
and that wars occur in that space - is a metaphor of exceeding power and explanatory utility. Transpersonal
motive forces do wage war with one another over vast spans of time; are each forced to come to terms with
their powerful "opponents" in the intrapsychic hierarchy. The battles between the different "ways of life"
(or different philosophies) that eternally characterize human societies can usefully be visualized as combat
undertaken by different standards of value (and, therefore, by different hierarchies of motivation). The
"forces" involved in such wars do not die, as they are "immortal": the human beings acting as "pawns of
the gods" during such times are not so fortunate.
Back to the Enuma elish: The secondary/patriarchal deities of the Mesopotamian celestial pantheon -
including the couples Lahmu and Lahamu and Kishar and Anshar - arose as a direct consequence of the
interactions of the original sexualized "unity" of Tiamat and Apsu, the most primal of couples. This
undifferentiated "precosmogonic egg" (a common metaphor in other creation myths) "contains" an alloy of
"order" (the "masculine" principle") and "chaos" (the "feminine" principle). This alloy is the "world
parents," locked in "creative embrace" (is "spirit" and "matter," conceived alternatively, still "one thing").
Tiamat and Apsu's union gives rise to children - the primordial "instincts" or "forces of life" who, in turn,
engender more individualized beings. The Enuma elish itself does not spend much time fleshing out the
specific characteristics of these "forces of life," as it is "concentrating" on a more general story. Lahmu and
Lahamu and Kishar and Anshar are incidental characters, serving only as intermediaries between the real
protagonists of the drama - Marduk, a late-born individual-like "god," and Tiamat, his turncoat "mother."
Kishar and Anshar therefore serve only as progenitors of Anu, who in turn "begot Ea,
227 his likeness," "the
master of his fathers,"28 "broad of understanding, wise, mighty in strength, much stronger than his
grandfather, Anshar,"29 without "rival among the gods his brothers."0
The elder gods, in totality, serve to reproduce and to noisily act. Their incessant racket and movement
upsets the divine parents; disturbs "the inner parts of Tiamat."1 So Tiamat and her husband Apsu conspire
to "devour" their children. This is a common mythological occurrence; one echoed "later" in the story of
Yahweh, Noah and the Flood. The "gods" give birth to the cosmos, but ceaselessly attempt to destroy it.
97 


Ea catches wind of his parents' plot, however, however, and slays Apsu - adding insult to injury by
building a house on his remains (and by naming that house Apsu, in mockery or remembrance). Into this
house he brings his bride, Damkina, who soon gives birth to Marduk, the hero of the story, "the wisest of
the wise, the wisest of the gods,"2 filled with "awe-inspiring majesty."3 When Ea saw his son:
"He rejoiced, he beamed, his heart was filled with joy.
He distinguished him and conferred upon him double equality with the gods,
So that he was highly exalted and surpassed them in everything.
Artfully arranged beyond comprehension were his members,
Not fit for human understanding, hard to look upon.
Four were his eyes, four were his ears.
When his lips moved, fire blazed forth.
Each of his four ears grew large,
And likewise his eyes, to see everything.
He was exalted among the gods, surpassing was his form;
His members were gigantic, he was surpassing in height.
Mariyutu, Mariyutu:
Son of the sun-god, the sun-god of the gods!"4
Marduk is characterized by the metaphoric associates of consciousness. He has exaggerated sensory
capacities; his very words are characterized by creative and destructive power (by the transformative
capacity of fire). He is the "sun-god," above all, which means that he is assimilated to (or, more accurately,
occupies the same "categorical space") as "sight," "vision," "illumination," "enlightenment," "dawn," the
"elimination of darkness," and the "death of the night."
In the midst of all this action - war-plans, death, birth - Anu (Marduk's grandfather, Ea's father) busies
himself with the generation of the four winds. His work raises waves upon the surface of the waters
occupied by Tiamat, and the (previously unidentified) primary/matriarchal subdeities that (apparently)
accompany her there. This new intrusion troubles her beyond tolerance, upset as she was already is at the
noise of her offspring and death of her husband. She decides to rid the universe of the irritant
(secondary/patriarchal) elder gods, once and for all, and begins to produce horrible "soldiers," to aid her in
battle:
"... bearing monster serpents
Sharp of tooth and not sparing the fang.
With poison instead of blood she filled their bodies.
Ferocious dragons she clothed with terror,
She crowned them with fear-inspiring glory and made them like gods,
So that he who would look upon them should perish from terror."5
The "angry" Tiamat - the unknown, chaos, in its terrible or destructive aspect - produces eleven species of
monsters to aid her in her battle - including the viper, the dragon, the great lion, the rabid dog, the
scorpion-man and the storm-demon - and elects the first born, Kingu by name, to reign over them all,
giving him "the tablet of destinies"6 to signify his ascension and dominion. The story continues:
"After Tiamat had made strong preparations,
She made ready to join battle with the gods her offspring.
To avenge Apsu, Tiamat did this evil.
How she got ready for the attack was revealed to Ea.
When Ea heard of this matter,
He became benumbed with fear and sat in silent gloom.
After he had reflected on the matter and his wrath had subsided,
He went to Anshar, his [great]grandfather.
And when he had come into the presence of Anshar, his [great]grandfather.
He communicated to him all that Tiamat had planned."7
98 
It was Ea, you might remember, who killed Apsu. Now, although Apsu isn't well described in the Enuma
elish, it is clear that he is the masculine consort of Tiamat. The "masculine" consort of the "goddess of the
unknown" is inevitably the "god of the known" (or his "progenitor" and dependent, the knower). It is the
"known" that serves as protection from the unknown - whether this is understood or not. Ea "kills" Apsu,
which means that he "unconsciously" strips himself of protection.
Ea might therefore be reasonably regarded as representative of that part of humanity eternally (and
ignorantly) contemptuous of tradition - and willing to undermine or destroy that tradition, without
understanding its necessity or nature. Those "unconsciously" protected from the outside world by the
"walls of culture" may become irritated by the limitations such walls represent, and incautiously pull them
down. This act of destruction, disguised as a blow for freedom, lets the terrible unknown flood back in. The
"Great Mother" is a terrible force, in the absence of "patriarchal" protection. The Enuma elish makes this
vital point, implicitly. This state of affairs is represented schematically in Figure 20: The "Death" of
Apsu, and the (Re)Emergence of Tiamat as Threat.
The "Death" of Apsu, and the (Re)Emergence of Tiamat as Threat.
Anshar is terribly upset by the news of Tiamat's anger. He asks Ea, who defeated Apsu, to stand against
Tiamat. Ea fails, deservedly, and Anshar sends Anu in his stead. He is routed as well, and returns,
overcome by terror. In desperation and final hope, Anshar and Ea call on Marduk, the young sun-god:
"Ea called Marduk to his private room;

He advised him, telling him the plan of his heart:

'Marduk, consider my idea, hearken to thy father.
Thou art he, my son, who relieves his heart;

Draw nigh into the presence of Anshar, ready for battle;
99 

Speak and stand forth; when he sees thee, he will be at rest.'
[Marduk] was glad at the word of his father;
He drew nigh and stood before Anshar.
When Anshar saw him, his heart was filled with joy;
He kissed his lips, his fear was removed.
"Anshar, be not silent, but open thy lips;
I will go and accomplish all that is in thy heart!
What man is it who has brought battle against thee?
Tiamat, who is a woman, is coming against thee with arms!
My father, creator, be glad and rejoice;
Soon thou shalt trample upon the neck of Tiamat!
Yea, my father, creator, be glad and rejoice;
Soon thou shalt trample upon the neck of Tiamat!"
Anshar answers:
My son, who knowest all wisdom,
Quiet Tiamat with thy holy incantation." 238
Marduk's "magic words" (remember, he speaks fire) are clearly and reasonably portrayed as one of the
most powerful weapons in the battle against the forces of chaos. Anshar continues:
"On the storm chariot quickly pursue the way!
[...]... turn her back!
The lord was glad at the word of his father;
His heart exulted, and he said to his father:
"Lord of the gods, destiny of the great gods,
If I am indeed to be your avenger,
To vanquish Tiamat and to keep you alive,
Convene the assembly and proclaim my lot supreme [emphasis added].
When ye are joyfully seated together in the Court of Assembly,
May I through the utterance of my mouth determine the destinies, instead of you.
Whatever I create shall remain unaltered,
The command of my lips shall not return, ... it shall not be changed."9
Alexander Heidel - who provided the translation of the Enuma elish cited here - comments:
"Marduk demands supreme and undisputed authority as the price for risking his life in combat with
Tiamat. When therefore the gods, at the New Year's festival [see discussion below], convened in the
Court of Assembly, 'they reverently waited' on Marduk, the 'king of the gods of heaven and earth,' and
in that spirit they decided the destinies. The gods, indeed, 'continue to "determine destinies" long after
Marduk has received the powers he here desires'240; but the final decision rested with Marduk, so that in
the last analysis it was he who decided the fates."41
This is an example of the "hierarchical organization of the gods," - a concept frequently encapsulated in
mythology, and one we shall return to later. All the original children of Tiamat are potent and impersonal
elder gods, "psychological forces" - the "deities" that eternally rule or constitute human motivation and
affect. The question of the proper ordering of those forces ("who, or what, should rule?") comprises the
central problem of morality - and the primary problem facing human individuals and social organizations.
The Sumerian "solution" to this problem was the elevation of Marduk - the sun-god who voluntarily faces
chaos - to the position of "king" (and the subjugation of the other gods to that "king"):
"Anshar opened his mouth
And addressed these words to Kaka, his vizier:
'Kaka, my vizier, who gladdenest my heart,
100 
Unto Lahmu and Lahamu I will send thee;
Thou knowest how to discern and art able to relate.
Cause the gods my fathers to be brought before me.
Let them bring all the gods to me!
Let them converse and sit down to banquet.

Let them eat bread and prepare wine.
For Marduk, their avenger, let them decree the destiny.

Set out, O Kaka, go, and stand thou before them.
What I am about to tell thee repeat unto them.
Anshar, your son, has sent me.
The command of his heart he has charged me to convey,

Saying: Tiamat, our bearer, hates us.
She held a meeting and raged furiously.
All the gods went over to her;

Even those who ye have created march at her side.
They separated themselves and went over to the side of Tiamat;

They were angry, they plotted, not resting day or night;

They took up the fight, fuming and raging;

They held a meeting and planned the conflict.

Mother Hubur [Tiamat], who fashions all things,
Added thereto irresistible weapons, bearing monster serpents

Sharp of tooth and not sparing the fang.
With poison instead of blood she filled their bodies.
Ferocious dragons she clothed with terror,
She crowned them with fear-inspiring glory and made them like gods.
So that they might cause him who would look upon them to perish from terror,
So that their bodies might leap forward and none turn back their breasts.
She set up the viper, the dragon, and the lahumum

The great lion, the mad dog, and the scorpion-man,
Driving storm demons, the dragonfly, and the bison,
Bearing unsparing weapons, unafraid of battle.
Powerful are her decrees, irresistible are they.
Altogether eleven kinds of monsters of this sort she brought into being.
Of those among the gods, her first-born, who formed her assembly,
She exalted Kingu; in their midst she made him great.
To march at the head of the army, to direct the forces,
To raise the weapons for the engagement, to launch the attack,
The high command of the battle,
She intrusted to his hand; she caused him to sit in the assembly, saying:

I have cast the spell for thee, I have made thee great in the assembly of the gods.
The dominion over all the gods I have given into thy hand.
Mayest thou be highly exalted, thou my unique spouse!
May thy names become greater than those of the Anunnaki!
She gave him the tablet of destinies, she fastened it upon his breast, saying
"As for thee, thy command shall not be changed, the word of thy mouth shall be dependable!"
Now when Kingu had been exalted and had received supreme dominion,
They decreed the destinies of the gods, her sons, saying:

"May the opening of our mouths quiet the fire-god!
May thy overpowering poison vanquish the opposing night!"
I sent Anu, but he could not face her.
Ea also was afraid and turned back.
Then Marduk, the wisest of the gods, your son, came forward.
His heart prompted him to face Tiamat.
101 

He opened his mouth and said to me:
"If I am indeed to be your avenger,
To vanquish Tiamat and to keep you alive,
Convene the assembly and proclaim my lot supreme.
When ye are joyfully seated together in the Court of Assembly,
May I through the utterance of my mouth determine the destinies, instead of you.
Whatever I create shall remain unaltered,
The command of my lips shall not return void, it shall not be changed."
Hasten to me then and speedily fix for him your destiny,
That he may go to meet your powerful enemy!'"42
The "hierarchical organization of the gods" is represented schematically in Figure 21: "World" of
Gods: Hierarchical Organization, which portrays "Marduk" as the superordinate "personality" or "pattern
of action," "designed" to transform the unbearable present into the desired future. The Enuma elish states,
essentially: "when things are normal, any god might rule. However, in the case of a true crisis, everyone
turns to the sun-god (the embodiment of "consciousness"). Perhaps it is reasonable to presume, therefore,
that he should always reign supreme." The "formulation" of this "hypothesis" was a work of unsurpassed
genius, and a decisive move in the history of the Western mind.
"World" of Gods: Hierarchical Organization
The vizier Kaka goes on his way, as commanded, and spreads the word among the (secondary/
patriarchal) elder deities, who assemble to contemplate the upcoming battle:
102 



"They entered into the presence of Anshar and filled the Court of Assembly;
They kissed one another as they came together in the assembly;
They conversed and sat down to a banquet.
They ate bread and prepared wine.
The sweet wine dispelled their fears;
Their bodies swelled as they drank the strong drink.
Exceedingly carefree were they, their spirit was exalted;
For Marduk, their avenger, they decreed the destiny.
They erected for him a lordly throne-dais,
And he took his place before his fathers to receive sovereignty.
'Thou art the most important among the great gods,
Thy destiny is unequaled, thy command is like that of Anu.
Marduk, thou art the most important among the great gods.
Thy destiny is unequaled, thy command is like that of Anu.
From this day onward thy command shall not be changed.
To exalt and abase - this shall be thy power!
Dependable shall be the utterance of thy mouth, thy command shall not prove vain.
None among the gods shall infringe upon thy prerogative.'"43
The gods place "the starry garment of the night sky"44 in their midst. At the command of Marduk's
mouth - on his word - it appears; at his command, it disappears, "as the night sky on the passage of the
sun." 245 Marduk is clearly part of the pantheon who eternally vanquish the dragon of the night. The story
continues:
"When the gods his fathers beheld the power of his word,
They were glad and did homage, saying: 'Marduk is king!'
They bestowed upon him the scepter, the throne, and the royal robe;
They gave him an irresistible weapon smiting the enemy, saying:
'Go and cut off the life of Tiamat.
May the winds carry her blood to out-of-the-way places.'
After the gods his fathers had determined the destiny of [Marduk],
They set him on the road - the way to success and attainment."46
Marduk gathers his armaments - bow, club, and lightning - sets himself ablaze, and fashions a net to
enclose Tiamat. He is a master of fire, and armaments - which is to say, a master of the technology that
serves most fundamentally to transform the "unknown and terrifying world" into the comforting,
productive and familiar. He is able to "bind" the unknown; to limit its sphere of action, and to bring it
under control. He raises the winds, and the storm to aid him, using the forces of nature against nature itself.
He dresses himself in a terrifying coat of mail, and wears "terror-inspiring splendor" on his head. Prepared
carefully in this manner, and fortified against poison, he takes the "direct route" to Tiamat. He confronts
"novelty" voluntarily, at a time of his choosing, after careful preparation, and without avoidance. His mere
appearance strikes terror into the heart of Kingu and his legion of monsters (just as Christ, much "later,"
terrifies the Devil and his minions). Marduk confronts Tiamat, accuses her of treachery, and challenges her
to battle.
"When Tiamat heard this,
She became like one in a frenzy and lost her reason.
Tiamat cried out loud and furiously,
To the very roots her two legs shook back and forth.
She recites an incantation, repeatedly casting her spell;
As for the gods of battle, they sharpen their weapons.
Tiamat and Marduk, the wisest of the gods, advanced against one another;
They pressed on to single combat, they approached for battle."47
103 




Marduk fills Tiamat with "an evil wind," which distends her belly. When she opens her mouth, to
devour him, he lets an arrow fly, which tears her interior, and splits her heart. He subdues her, completely,
casts down her carcass, and stands upon it. His voluntarily encounter with the forces of the unknown
produce a decisive victory. He rounds up her subordinates - including Kingu, who he deprives of the tablet
of destinies - and binds them with netting. Then he returns to Tiamat:
"The lord trod upon the hinder part of Tiamat,
And with his unsparing club he split her skull.
He cut the arteries of her blood
And caused the north wind to carry it to out-of-the-way places....
He split her open like a mussel into two parts;
Half of her he set in place and formed the sky (therewith) as a roof.
He fixed the crossbar and posted guards;
He commanded them not to let her waters escape.
He crossed the heavens and examined the regions.
He placed himself opposite the Apsu, the dwelling of Ea.
The lord measured the dimensions of the Apsu,
And a great structure, he established, namely Esharra [Earth]."48
Marduk then constructs the heavenly order, fashioning the year, defining the twelve-sign zodiac,
determining the movement of the stars, the planets and the moon.249 Finally, he deigns to create man (out of
Kingu, the greatest and most guilty of Tiamat's allies), so that "upon him shall the services of the gods be
imposed that they may be at rest"50; then, he returns the gods allied with him to their appropriate celestial
abodes. Grateful, they deliver him a present:
"'Now, O Lord, who hast established our freedom from compulsory service,
What shall be the sign of our gratitude before thee?
Come, let us make something whose name shall be called "Sanctuary."
It shall be a dwelling for our rest at night; come, let us repose therein!'"51
The dwelling is Babylon, center of civilization, mythic sacred space, dedicated in perpetuity to Marduk.
The mythic tale of the Enuma elish describes the nature of the eternal relationship between the
(unknowable) source of all things, the "gods" who rule human life, and the subject or process who
constructs determinate experience, through voluntary encounter with the unknown. The "full story"
presented in the Sumerian creation myth is presented, schematically, in Figure 22: The Enuma elish in
Schematic Representation. Tiamat is portrayed, simultaneously, as the thing that breeds everything (as the
mother of all the gods); as the thing that destroys all things; as the consort of a patriarchal spiritual
principle, upon who creation also depends (Apsu); and, finally, as the thing that is cut into pieces by the
hero who constructs the world. Marduk, the last-born "child" of instinct, is the hero who voluntarily faces
the creative/destructive power that comprises the "place" from which all things emerge. He is the martial
deity, role-model for the culture of the West, who violently carves the unknown into pieces, and makes the
predictable world from those pieces.
This tale "contains" within it a complex and sophisticated notion of causality. None of its elements exist
in contradiction with one another, even though they lay stress on different aspects of the same process.
Something must exist, prior to the construction of identifiable things (something that cannot be imagined,
in the absence of a subject). That thing might usefully be portrayed as the "all-devouring mother of
everything." The particular, discriminable, familiar elements of human experience exist as they do,
however, because the conscious subject can detect, construct and transform them. The "son-hero's" role in
the "birth" of things is therefore as primal as the "mother's," although this part is somewhat more difficult
to comprehend. Nonetheless, the Sumerians manage the representation, in narrative form. It is a relatively
small step from this dramatic/imagistic portrayal of the hero to the most explicit Christian doctrine of
Logos - the creative Word (and from there to our notion of "consciousness").


The mythic tale of Marduk and Tiamat refers to the capacity of the individual to explore, voluntarily,
and to bring things into being, as a consequence. The hero cuts the world of the unpredictable - unexplored
territory, signified by Tiamat - into its distinguishable elements; weaves a net of determinate meaning,
capable of encompassing the vast unknown; embodies the divine "masculine" essence, which has as its
most significant feature the capacity to transform chaos into order. The killing of an all-embracing monster,
and the construction of the universe from its body parts, is symbolic (metaphorical) representation of the
central, adaptive process of heroic encounter with the undifferentiated unknown, and the construction or
generation of differentiated order as a consequence. It is this process, emulated by the emperor of
Mesopotamia (who ritually embodied Marduk), that served as the basis for his authority - and, indeed, that
serves to undergird the idea of lawful authority, to the present day. The Mesopotamian emperor's
identification with the most divine of all the deities (according to the judgment and election of those
selfsame powers) lent him power, and served to maintain social and psychological order among his people.
Furthermore, the Mesopotamian emperor stood in the same relationship to his people as Marduk stood to
him: as ritual model for emulation, as the personality whose actions served as pattern for all actions
undertaken in the kingdom - as the personality that was the state, insofar as the state defined and brought
order to interpersonal interactions (which, after all, is its primary function). Babylon was therefore
conceptualized as "the kingdom of god on earth" - that is, as a profane imitation of heaven. The emperor
served this "imitated heaven" as the "imitator of Marduk," at least insofar as he was conservative, just,
courageous and creative. Eliade comments on the sacrality of the Mesopotamian sovereign, and describes
the rituals designed to maintain that sacrality:
105 






"At Babylon the Enuma elish was recited in the temple on the fourth day of the New Year festival. This
festival, named zagmuk ("beginning of the year") in Sumerian and akitu in Akkadian [note: the
Sumerians and Akkadians united to form Babylon], took place during the first twelve days of the month
of Nisan. It comprised several sequences, of which we will mention the most important: (1) a day of
expiation for the king, corresponding to Marduk's "captivity"; (2) the freeing of Marduk; (3) ritual
combats and a triumphal procession, led by the king, to the Bit Akitu (the house of the New Year
festival), where a banquet was held; (4) the hieros gamos [mystical marriage] of the king with a
hierodule [ritual slave/prostitute] personifying the goddess; and (5) the determination of destinies by the
gods."52
The meaning of some terminology, and the nature of the latter two sequences, must be clarified here:
First [with regards to (4)], it should be noted that "hieros gamos" means mystical marriage - the
marriage of the king, and the queen or goddess. This marriage provides dramatic representation of the
union of the exploratory tendency (incarnated by the king) with the positive aspect of the unknown,
incarnated by the hierodule. Marduk (the king) is originally "shut up," signifying his temporary
disappearance (see the description of Osiris, below) during the normal or day-to-day operations of the state.
He is freed, to meet Tiamat; he does so, in sexual union. This sexual (read: creative) union - the
juxtaposition of the process of knowing, embodied by the king (Marduk), with the unknown, embodied by
Tiamat (incarnated by the hierodule) - is what gives rise to the generation of new information and patterns
of adaptation. The process of generating knowledge is therefore assimilated to the domain of sexual union,
as the primordial creative process. The deity of chaos, or the unknown, appears most generally as feminine
(and as half negative, and half positive) once the initial division between order and chaos has been
established. The attribution of femininity to this deity, so to speak, occurs most fundamentally because the
unknown serves as the matrix from which determinate forms are borne. The negative attribution (Tiamat
serves as example) exists because the unknown has a destructive aspect; the positive (the hierodule here,
Isis in the Egyptian myth of Osiris, Mary in Christianity) because the unknown is also creative or
generative.
Second [with regards to (5)], it should be noted that the king (in his incarnation as god) served to
"determine destinies" because he was both hero - ritual model for emulation - and absolute ruler. As such,
he literally controlled individual destinies, serving as he did, practically and in representation, as the most
powerful individual in society, and the most dominant "strategy" in the hierarchy of behavioral adaptation.
What he could not determine, by law, however, he was to provide by example (as the "body of laws," as
embodiment of past wisdom, is insufficient to deal with the challenges of the present). This idea is
developed much more explicitly by the Egyptians, as we shall see. Back to Eliade's story:
"The first sequence of this mythico-ritual scenario - the king's humiliation and Marduk's captivity -
indicates the regression of the world to the precosmogonic chaos. In the sanctuary of Marduk the high
priest stripped the king of his emblems (scepter, ring, scimitar and crown) and struck him in the face.
Then, on his knees, the king uttered a declaration of innocence: "I have not sinned, O lord of the lands, I
have not been negligent regarding thy divinity." The high priest, speaking in Marduk's name, replied:
"Do not fear.... Marduk will hear thy prayer. He will increase thy dominion."
During this time the people sought for Marduk, supposed to be "shut up in the mountain" (a formula
indicating the "death" of a divinity)... [in consequence of a descent] "far from the sun and light."
When the world "regresses" to "precosmogonic chaos," it is always the case that the hero is missing.
The hero is, after all, incarnation of the process by which chaos is transformed into order. If chaos has the
upper hand, it is by definition because of a current paucity of heroism. It can be said, therefore, that the reappearance
of the Great Mother, in her terrible guise, the death of the Great Father (who serves as
protection from his creative and destructive wife), and the absence of the hero (who turns chaos into order)
all represent different ways of telling the same story - the story which describes a life-threatening
imbalance in the powers of the constituent elements of experience. Eliade continues, describing the
"rediscovery" or "reemergence" of Marduk:
106 






"Finally, he was delivered, and the gods assembled (that is, their statues were brought together) to
determine the destinies. (This episode corresponds, in the Enuma elish, to Marduk's advancement to the
rank of supreme god.) The king led the procession to the Bit Akitu, a building situated outside of the city
[outside the domain of civilization, or order]. The procession represented the army of the gods
advancing against Tiamat. According to an inscription of Sennacherib, we may suppose that the
primordial battle was mimed, the king personifying Assur (the god who had replaced Marduk). The
hieros gamos took place after the return from the banquet at the Bit Akitu. The last act consisted in the
determination of the destinies for each month of the year. By "determining" it, the year was ritually
created, that is, the good fortune, fertility, and richness of the new world that had just been born were
insured....
The role of the king in the akitu is inadequately known. His "humiliation" corresponds to the
regression of the world to chaos and to Marduk's captivity in the mountain. The king personifies the god
in the battle against Tiamat and in the hieros gamos with a hierodule. But identification with the god is
not always indicated; as we have seen, during his "humiliation" the king addresses Marduk.
Nevertheless, the sacrality of the Mesopotamian sovereign is amply documented....
Though the king recognized his earthly begetting, he was considered a "son of god" ... This twofold
descent made him supremely the intermediary between gods and men. The sovereign represented the
people before the gods, and it was he who expiated the sins of his subjects. Sometimes he had to suffer
death for his people's crimes; this is why the Assyrians had a "substitute for the king." The texts
proclaim that the king had lived in fellowship with the gods in the fabulous garden that contains the Tree
of Life and the Water of Life.... The king is the "envoy" of the gods, the "shepherd of the people,"
named by god to establish justice and peace on earth....
It could be said that the king shared in the divine modality, but without becoming a god. He
represented the god, and this, on the archaic levels of culture, also implied that he was in a way he
whom he personified. In any case, as mediator between the world of men and the world of the gods, the
Mesopotamian king effected, in his own person, a ritual union between the two modalities of existence,
the divine and the human. It was by virtue of this twofold nature that the king was considered, at least
metaphorically, to be the creator of life and fertility."53
Marduk, in his manifestation as Namtillaku, is also "the god who restores to life"54 - who can restore all
"ruined gods, as though they were his own creation; The lord who by holy incantation restore[s] the dead
gods to life."55 This idea echoes through ancient Egyptian theology, as described below. Marduk is
Namshub, as well, "the bright god who brightens our way"56 - which once again assimilates him to the sun
- and Asaru, the god of resurrection, who "causes the green herb to spring up."57 Whatever Marduk
represents is also considered central to creation of rich abundance,258 to mercy,259 and justice,260 to familial
love,261 and, most interestingly, to the "creation of ingenious things" from the "conflict with Tiamat."62
[!!!] He was in fact addressed by fifty names by the Mesopotamians. Each name signified an independent
valuable attribute or property (likely at one time separate gods), now regarded as clearly dependent for its
existence upon him, and what his pattern of action signified. It seems evident that the attribution of these
fifty names to Marduk parallels the movement towards monotheism described in the Enuma elish itself
(with all the gods organizing themselves voluntarily under Marduk's dominion) and occurring in
Mesopotamian society, at the human and historical level. It might be said that the Mesopotamians "came to
realize" (in ritual and image, at least) that all the life-sustaining processes that they worshipped in
representation were secondary aspects of the exploratory/creative/rejuvenating process embodied by
Marduk.
A similar pattern of ritual and secondary conceptualization characterized ancient Egyptian society. In
the earliest Egyptian cosmology (circa 2700 B.C.), the god Ptah, a spiritualized manifestation of Atum, the
all-encircling serpent, creates "by his mind (his "heart") and his word (his "tongue")."63 Eliade states:
"Ptah is proclaimed the greatest god, Atum being considered only the author of the first divine couple. It
is Ptah "who made the gods exist."...
107 
In short, the theogony and the cosmogony are effected by the creative power of the thought and word
of a single god. We here certainly have the highest expression of Egyptian metaphysical speculation. As
John Wilson observes,264 it is at the beginning of Egyptian history that we find a doctrine that can be
compared with the Christian theology of the Logos [or Word]."65
The Egyptians "realized" that consciousness and linguistic ability were vital to the existence of things -
precisely as vital as the unknowable matrix of their being. This idea still has not fully permeated our
explicit understanding (since we attribute the existence of things purely to their "material" "substrate") -
despite its centrality to Christian thinking. The Egyptians viewed Ptah - the spermatic word - as the
original, or primordial (read "heavenly" king). As in Mesopotamia, essentially, he ceded this power, in the
earthly domain, to his successor, the pharaoh [his "actual" or "literal" son, from the Egyptian viewpoint (as
the Pharaoh was viewed as god)]. The creative power thus transferred was literally defined by the
Egyptians as the ability to put order (Ma c at) "in the place of Chaos."66 Eliade comments:
"... it is these same terms that are used of Tut-ankh-Amon when he restored order after the "heresy" of
Akh-en-Aton, or of Pepi II: "He put ma c at in the place of falsehood (of disorder)." Similarly, the verb
khay, "to shine," is used indifferently to depict the emergence of the sun at the moment of creation or at
each dawn and the appearance of the pharaoh at the coronation ceremony, at festivals, or at the privy
council.
The pharaoh is the incarnation of ma c at, a term translated by "truth" but whose general meaning is
"good order" and hence "right," "justice." Ma c at belongs to the original creation; hence it reflects the
perfection of the Golden Age. Since it constitutes the very foundation of the cosmos and life, ma c at can
be known by each individual separately. In texts of different origins and periods, there are such
declarations as these: "Incite your heart to know ma c at"; "I make thee to know the thing of ma c at in thy
heart; mayest thou do what is right for thee!" Or: "I was a man who loved ma c at and hated sin. For I
knew that (sin) is an abomination to God." And in fact it is God who bestows the necessary knowledge.
A prince is defined as "one who knows truth (ma c at) and whom God teaches." The author of a prayer to
Re cries: "Mayest Thou give me ma c at in my heart!"
As incarnating Ma c at, the pharaoh constitutes the paradigmatic example for all his subjects. As the
vizier Rekh-mi-Re expresses it: "He is a god who makes us live by his acts." The work of the pharaoh
insures the stability of the cosmos and the state and hence the continuity of life. And indeed the
cosmogony is repeated every morning, when the solar god "repels" the serpent Apophis, though without
being able to destroy him; for chaos ( = the original darkness) represents virtuality; hence it is
indestructible. The pharaoh's political activity repeats Re's exploit: he too "repels" Apophis, in other
words he sees to it that the world does not return to chaos. When enemies appear at the frontiers, they
will be assimilated to Apophis [the god of primordial chaos], and the pharaoh's victory will reproduce
Re's triumph [emphasis added]."67
The ideas of kingship, creativity and renewal are given a different and more sophisticated slant
in the central myth of Osiris, which served as an alternate basis for Egyptian theology. The story of
Osiris, and his son Horus, is much more complex, in some ways, than the Mesopotamian creation myth, or
the story of Re, and describes the interactions between the "constituent elements of experience" in
exceedingly compressed form. Osiris was a primeval king, a legendary ancestral figure, who ruled Egypt
wisely and fairly. His evil brother, Seth - who he did not understand268 - rose up against him. Figure 23:
The Battle between Osiris and Seth in the Domain of Order portrays this conflict as a "war" in the
"(heavenly) domain of order." Seth kills Osiris (that is, sends him to the underworld) and dismembers his
body, so that it can never be "found." Figure 24: The Involuntary Descent and Disintegration of Osiris
portrays Osiris' "involuntary descent and disintegration," and his quasi-"existence" in the underworld of
chaos.
The Battle between Osiris and Seth in the Domain of Order

Figure 24: The Involuntary Descent and Disintegration of Osiris

The death of Osiris signifies two important things: (1) the tendency of a (static) ruling idea, system of
valuation, or particular story - no matter how initially magnificent or appropriate - to become increasingly
irrelevant with time; and (2) the dangers that necessarily accrue to a state that "forgets" or refuses to admit
to the existence of the immortal deity of evil. Seth, the king's brother and opposite, represents the mythic
"hostile twin" or "adversary" who eternally opposes the process of creative encounter with the unknown;
signifies, alternatively speaking, a pattern of adaptation characterized by absolute opposition to
establishment of divine order. When this principle gains "control" - that is, usurps the throne - the "rightful
king" and his kingdom are necessarily doomed. Seth, and figures like him - often represented in narrative
by the corrupt "right hand man" or "advisor to the once-great king" - view human existence itself with
contempt. Such figures are motivated only to protect or advance their position in the power hierarchy, even
when the prevailing order is clearly counterproductive. Their actions necessarily speed the process of
decay, endemic to all structures. Osiris, although great, was naive in some profound sense - blind, at least,
to the existence of "immortal" evil. This blindness, and its resultant incaution, brings about (or at least
hastens) Osiris' demise.

Figure 25: The Birth and Return of Horus, Divine Son of Order and Chaos
Osiris has a wife, as befits the "king of order." Isis, as Osiris' mythic counterpart, is representative of the
positive aspect of the unknown (like the hierodule in the Mesopotamian New Year's ritual). She is
possessed of great magical powers, as might be expected, given her status. She gathers up Osiris' scattered
pieces, and makes herself pregnant, with the use of his dismembered phallus. This story makes a profound


point: the degeneration of the "state" or "domain of order" and its "descent" into chaos serves merely to
fructify that domain and to make it "pregnant." In chaos lurks great potential. When a great organization
disintegrates - falls into pieces - the pieces might still usefully be fashioned into, or give rise to, something
else (perhaps something more vital, and still greater). Isis therefore gives birth to a son, Horus, who returns
to his "rightful kingdom," to confront his evil uncle. This process is schematically represented in Figure
25: The Birth and Return of Horus, Divine Son of Order and Chaos.
Horus fights a difficult battle with Seth - as the forces of evil are difficult to overcome - and loses an
eye in the process. Seth is overcome, nonetheless; Horus recovers his eye. The story could quit there,
narrative integrity intact, with the now-whole and victorious Horus' well-deserved ascension to the throne.
However, Horus does the unexpected, descending voluntarily to the underworld to find his father (as
portrayed schematically in Figure 26: Voluntary Encounter with the Underworld). It is representation of
this move - reminiscent of Marduk's voluntary journey to the "underworld" of Tiamat - that constitutes the
brilliant and original contribution of Egyptian theology.
ORDER
CHAOS
HORUS

OSIRIS
THE
UNDERWORLD
ISIS
Figure 26: Voluntary Encounter with the Underworld
Horus discovers Osiris, extant in a state of torpor. He offers his recovered eye to his father - so that
Osiris can "see," once again. They return, united and victorious, and establish a revivified kingdom. The
kingdom of the "son and father" is an improvement over that of the father or the son alone, as it unites the
hard-won wisdom of the past (that is, of the dead) with the adaptive capacity of the present (that is, of the
living). The (re)establishment and improvement of the domain of order is schematically represented in
Figure 27: Ascent, and Reintegration of the Father.
Ascent, and Reintegration of the Father
In the story of Osiris, the senescence/death of the father (presented as a consequence of the treachery of
Seth) is overcome by the mythic son, the hero who (temporarily) defeats the power of evil, and who
rejuvenates the father. Marduk, the Mesopotamian supreme god, is by comparison a straightforward hero:
he carves the familiar world from the unfamiliar. Horus, equally brave, is more complete, and more
sophisticated. He cannot remain content with his own ascension, feeling himself "incomplete" without his
"father." He therefore journeys voluntarily into the underworld, releases the disintegrated forces of tradition
"trapped" there, and makes them part of himself. This pattern of behavior constitutes an elaboration of that
represented by Marduk - or of Re, the Egyptian sun-god.
Marduk creates order from chaos. That capacity - which is theoretically embodied in the form of the
Mesopotamian emperor - lends temporal authority its rightful power. The same idea, elaborated
substantially, applies in Egypt. Osiris constitutes the old state, once-great, but dangerously anachronistic.
Horus partakes of the essence of tradition (he is the son of his father), but is vivified by an infusion of "new
information" (his mother, after all, is "the positive aspect of the unknown"). As an updated version of his
father, he is capable of dealing with the problems of the present (that is, with the emergent evil represented
by his uncle). Victorious over his uncle, he is nonetheless incomplete, as his youthful spirit lacks the
wisdom of the past. So he journeys into the unknown, where his father rests, "lifeless" - that is,
uncomprehended; without embodiment or incarnation (in action) in the present. Horus unites himself with
his father, and becomes the "ideal ruler" - the "consciousness" of present youthful life, conjoined with the
wisdom of tradition.
112 









The "dead" Egyptian pharaoh - that is, the ruler whose death preceded the ascension of the current
pharaoh - was assimilated to (occupied the same categorial space as) Osiris. That meant he was regarded as
equivalent to "the spirit that founded the state" - the archetypal creator-god or legendary ancestor whose
courageous actions had cosmogonic significance. The current ruler (who depended for much of his power
on the traditions of his predecessors, modified when necessary) was regarded as equivalent to Horus, and to
Re, the sun-god. The ruling pharaoh was therefore the power that generated order from chaos (as Re), and
the power that rejuvenated order, once it had degenerated into unthinking authoritarianism or too-rigid (and
blind) tradition. Furthermore, however, he was the rejuvenated Osiris (who was the "dead pharaoh") - so
he was tradition, given sight. The sophistication of this idea of reputable leadership - creative power,
regenerative power, and revivified tradition - cannot hardly be regarded as anything but remarkable. It is
also of overwhelming historical interest and modern relevance that the Egyptians increasingly came to
regard Osiris-Horus as an examplar, not just of the pharaoh, but of every individual in the kingdom. Eliade
states, with regards to later Egyptian burial practice:
"The texts formerly inscribed on the walls of the hidden chambers in the pyramids erected for the
pharaohs are now reproduced inside the coffins of the nobility and even of totally unprivileged people.
Osiris becomes the model for all those who hope to conquer death. A Coffin Text proclaims: "Thou art
now the son of a king, a prince, as long as thy heart (i.e., spirit) shall be with thee." Following Osiris'
example, and with his help, the dead are able to transform themselves into "souls," that is, into perfectly
integrated and hence indestructible spiritual beings. Murdered and dismembered, Osiris was
"reconstituted" by Isis and reanimated by Horus. In this way he inaugurated a new mode of existence:
from a powerless shade, he became a "person" who "knows," a duly initiated spiritual being."69
This development might also be regarded as an illustration of the increasing "psychologization,"
"abstraction" and "internalization" of religious ideation: in the earliest stages of representation, deities are
viewed as pluralistic, and as individualistic and fractious members of a supracelestial (that is, transpersonal
and immortal) community. Later, they are integrated into a hierarchy, as the culture becomes more
integrated, more sure about relative valuation and moral virtue - and a single god, with a multitude of
related features, comes to dominate. Development of monotheism thus parallels intrapsychic and
intracultural moral integration. As the average citizen identifies more and more clearly with this
monotheistic, integrated pattern, its "external" nature, as an attribute of the gods, recedes. It becomes more
clearly an attribute of the human being, per se - rather than a characteristic of the extra-individual world -
and more like what we would conceive of as a psychological trait. The god's subjective aspect - his or her
intrapsychic quality - becomes more evident, at least to the most sophisticated of intuitions, and the
possibility of "personal relationship" with the deity emerges as a prospect at the conceptual level of
analysis. The process is just begininng, in abstraction, in Mesopotamia and Egypt; as will be demonstrated,
it is the ancient Israelites who bring it most clearly to fruition, with potent and lasting effect. It does not
seem unreasonable to regard this development as a precursor to the Christian revolution, which granted
every individual the status of "son of god," - and of our modern notion of the "human right," which is our
metaphysically-predicated presumption that everyone, regardless of "earthly status," has a value to which
all temporal authority must bow.
The Egyptian pharaoh, like the Mesopotamian king, served as material incarnation of the process that
separates order from chaos; simultaneously, the pharaoh/king literally embodied the state. Finally, the
pharoah/king was the rejuvenator of his own "father." The "ideal" pharaoh/king was therefore the
exploratory process that gave rise to the state, the state itself, and the revivifying (exploratory) process that
updated the state, when it was in danger of too-conservative ossification. This massively complex and
sophisticated conceptualization is given added breadth and depth by consideration of its "psychological"
element. The "state" is not merely cultural; it is also "spiritual." As custom and tradition is established, it is
inculcated into each individual, and becomes part of their intrapsychic structure. The "state" is therefore
personality and social organization, simultaneously - personality and social order conjoined in the effort to
keep the terror of chaos at bay (or, better still, united in the effort to make something positively useful of
it). This means that the hero/king who establishes, embodies and updates the social world is also the same
force that establishes, embodies and updates the intrapsychic world, the personality - and that one act of
113 







update cannot necessarily or reasonably be distinguished from the other. In "improving" the world, the hero
improves himself; in improving himself, he sets example for the world.
Initially, the "personality of state" was in fact a ritual human model (a hero) to observe and imitate (an
entity represented in behavioral pattern); then a story about such ritual models (an entity represented in
imagination), and, finally - and only much later - an abstract construction of rules describing the explicit
rights and responsibilities of the citizenry - (an entity of words, the "body" of law). This increasingly
abstract and detailed construction develops from imitation to abstract representation, and comprises rules
and schemas of interpretations useful for maintaining stability of interpersonal interaction. It is the
establishment of these rules and schemas that gives determinate meaning to human experience, by bringing
predictability to all social situations (to all things encountered interpersonally). The same thing might be
said from the psychological perspective. It is incorporation of the "personality of state" - dominated by the
figure of the hero - that brings order to the inner community of necessity and desire; that brings order to the
generative chaos of the soul.
The Mesopotamian culture-hero/deity Marduk represents the capacity of the process of exploration (of
the unknown, eternally promising and threatening) to generate the world of experience; the Egyptian gods
Horus-Osiris represent the extended version of that capacity, which means not only generation of the world
from the unknown, but transformation of the pattern of adaptation which constitutes the known, when such
transformation becomes necessary.
Sometimes "adaptation" is merely a matter of the adjustment of the means to an end. More rarely, but
equally necessarily, adaptation is reconceptualization of "what is known" (unbearable present, desirable
future and means to attain such) - because what is is known is out of date, and therefore deadly. It is the
sum of these processes that manifests itself in the Judeo-Christian tradition as the mythic Word of God (and
which is embodied in Christ, the Christian culture-hero). This is the force that generates subject and object
from the primordial chaos (and, therefore, which predates the existence of both); the force that engenders
the tradition that makes vulnerable existence possible, in the face of constant mortal threat; and the force
that updates protective tradition, when it has become untenable, and tyrannical, on account of its age.
The Sumerian and Egyptian myths portray ideas of exceeding complexity, in ritual (dramatic) and
imagistic form. This form is not purposeful mystification, but the manner in which ideas emerge, before
they are sufficiently developed to be explicitly comprehensible. We acted out and provisionally formulated
complete, "impressionistic" models of the world of experience (which was the world we always had to
understand), long before the "contents" of such models could be understood, in the way we currently
conceive of understanding.
Brief analysis of the Sumerian and Egyptian theologies, and of the relationship of those theologies to
political action, shed substantial light on the manner in which many of our most important modern ideas
developed (and on what those ideas actually mean). This understanding, derived from two or three specific
examples, can be further enhanced through more general discussion. We therefore turn our attention from
analysis of complete stories - which have as their advantage a more compelling nature - to detailed
description of the mythological "characters" whose essence and interactions constitute the "world." The
totality of the world, which includes the significance of experienced things, as well as the things
themselves, is composed of what has been explored, and rendered familiar; what has yet to be encountered,
and is therefore unpredictable; and the process that mediates between the two. One final element must be
additionally considered: the state of being that includes or precedes the division of everything into these
three constituent elements. This state might be regarded as the true source of all things, subjects and objects
- as the single ancestor and final destination of all. The complete mythological "world of experience" is
portrayed schematically - as personality, territory and process - in Figure 28: The Constituent Elements
of Experience as Personality, Territory and Process. Our discussion turns first to the diverse nature of
representations of the original, undifferentiated state - the condition of primordial chaos - and then to a
more elaborated description of its "children" - the divine parents, nature and culture, and the divine son,
simultaneously child, primal creator, and eternal adversary.
The Constituent Elements of Experience as Personality, Territory and Process
2.3.3. The Dragon of Primordial Chaos
"The source of things is the boundless. From whence they arise, thence they must also of necessity return.
For they do penance and make compensation to one another for their injustice in the order of time." 270
It might seem futile to speculate about the nature of "that which existed prior to any experience," or "that
which has not yet been explored." Futile or not, such speculation has occupied a good portion of man's
time, as he attempted to understand the mystery of his emergence, and of the world he found himself
occupying. It seems impossible to determine what it is that was before anything was; myth attempts that
task, despite its impossibility. It does so using the tool of metaphor. The metaphorical statements of myth
work because unknown or partially known things inevitably share characteristics of importance with
somewhat more thoroughly investigated, comprehended and familiar things. Two or more objects or
situations come to occupy the same mythological or categorical space, therefore, because they share similar
form, function, or capacity to induce affect and compel behavior. A mandrake root, for example, has the
nature of a man, symbolically speaking, because it has the shape of a man; Mars is a warlike planet because
it is red, and red, the color of blood, is associated indelibly with aggression; the metal mercury (and the
"spirit" that inhabits it) is akin to seawater because both may serve as solvents or agents of transformation;
the dark and the animal of the forest are the same, because they are both unfamiliar - because they both
inhibit ongoing behavior, when they make their appearance; because they both cause fear. Metaphor links
thing to thing, situation to situation, concentrating on the phenomenological, affective, functional and
motivational features the linked situations share. Through such linkage, what might otherwise remain
entirely mysterious can begin to become comprehended - that is, used.
Myths of the origin metaphorically portray the nature of the infinite potential that characterized being,
prior to the dawn of experience. This general symbolic construction takes many particular forms, each of
115 





which might be said to constitute a partial attempt to represent the unrepresentable whole. These particular
forms range in nature from the specific and concrete to the general and abstract, and are influenced in their
development by the environmental and cultural conditions obtaining at the time of their emergence. The
process of metaphorical representation provides a bridge - and an increasingly communicable bridge -
between what can be directly explored, experienced and "comprehended," and what remains eternally
unknown.
Mythic symbols of the chaos of the beginning are imaginative pictures, whose purpose is representation
of a paradoxical totality - a "state," (which is already to say something too determinate) self-contained,
uniform, and complete, where everything now distinct resides in union: a state where being and non-being,
beginning and end, matter and energy, spirit and body, consciousness and unconsciousness, femininity and
masculinity, night and day remain compounded, prior to their discrimination into the separable elements of
experience. In this "state," all conceivable pairs of opposites and contradictory forces exist together -
within the all-encompassing embrace of an omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent and altogether mysterious
God. This "paradisal" precondition, lacking nothing, characterized by absolute completion, exists in
contradistinction to the profane world, imperfect and partial, suspended unbearably in time and in space;
surrounds that world completely, like the night surrounds the day - constitutes the beginning of things, the
fountainhead for everything and, similarly, the resting-place and destination point for all. William James
turned to poetry in his attempt to conceptualize this "place":
"No verbiage can give it, because the verbiage is other,
Incoherent, coherent - same.
And it fades! And it's infinite! AND it's infinite!...
Don't you see the difference, don't you see the identity?
Constantly opposites united!
The same me telling you to write and not to write!
Extreme - extreme, extreme!...
Something, and other than that thing!
Intoxication, and otherness than intoxication.
Every attempt at betterment, - every attempt at otherment
- is a -
It fades forever and forever as we move."1
This state - "the totality of all things" - might be regarded as "the objective world, in the absence of the
subject," although this conceptualization is too narrow, as primordial chaos also contains that which
"evolves into" the subject, when it is differentiated. What might be regarded as the standard objective
viewpoint is predicated on the idea that "things" as they are perceived exist regardless of the perceiver.
From a certain perspective, this is true. "Things" have a "nature" that appears independent of subjective
will, and follow their own laws of being and development - despite our wishes. However, the job of
determining what a "thing" is in the absence of the subject is much more difficult than might initially be
imagined. It is certainly the case - as we have seen - that the value of an object can shift with shift in frame
of reference. It appears to be true, however, that what an object is "is and of itself" is also subject to such
shift. Any given object - a table, say - exists as a table because it is only apprehended in a very limited and
restrained manner. Something is a table at a particular and isolated level of analysis, specified by the nature
of the observer. In the absence of this observer, one might ask - what is it that is being apprehended? Is the
proper level of analysis and specification subatomic, atomic or molecular (or all three at once)? Should the
table be considered an indistinguishable element of the earth upon which it rests, or of the solar system,
which contains the earth, or of the galaxy itself? The same problem obtains from the perspective of
temporality. What is now table was once tree; before that, earth - before that, rock; before that, star. What
is now table also has before it an equally complex and lengthy developmental history waiting in "front" of
it; it will be, perhaps, ash, then earth, then - far enough in the future - part of the sun again (when the sun
finally re-envelops the earth). The table is what it "is" only at a very narrow span of spatial and temporal
resolution (the span that precisely characterizes our consciousness). So what is the table, as an
"independent object" - "free," that is, of the restrictions that characterize the evidently limited human
viewpoint? What is it that can be conceptualized at all spatial and temporal levels of analysis
116 




simultaneously? Does the "existence" of the thing include its interactions with everything it influences, and
is influenced by, gravitationally and electromagnetically? Is that "thing" everything it once was, everything
it is, and everything it will be, all at the same "time"? Where then are its borders? How can it be
distinguished from other things? And - without such distinction - in what manner can it be said to "exist"?
Question: what is an object, in the absence of a frame of reference? Answer: it is everything
conceivable, at once - is something that constitutes the union of all currently discriminable opposites (and
something that cannot, therefore, be easily distinguished from nothing).
I am not saying that there are no such things as "things" - that would of course be patently absurd. It is
also fully apparent that the "things" we apprehend are "rule-governed" - the cosmos as we experience it is
orderly, and rationally comprehensible. What I am claiming is that "objective" things are in fact the product
of an interaction between whatever constitutes our limited consciousness and whatever constitutes the
unlimited "background" that makes up the world, in the absence of a subject. This is a stance informed by
mythology - in particular, by myths of the origin.
Archaic myths describing the ultimate origin concern themselves with representation of the source, not
of objects, in the modern sense, but of subjects and the experience of those subjects (some part of which
can be regarded as "objects"). Such myths typically describe the genesis of the world of experience by
relating the "existence" of a primordial god, by portraying the division of this god into the world-parents,
and by detailing the separation of those parents by their own "son." This is the division of the
hermaphroditic, all-encompassing, self-devouring-and-nourishing serpent of chaos into earth/matter and
sky/spirit, and the subsequent discrimination of those "primordial opposing forces" into identifiable aspects
of being. The Indo-European myth of Indra and Vrtra provides a representative example:
"The central myth of Indra, which is, furthermore, the most important myth in the Rig Veda, narrates his
victorious battle against Vrtra, the gigantic dragon who held back the waters in the "hollow of the
mountains." Strengthened by soma, Indra lays the serpent low with his vajdra ("thunderbolt"), the
weapon forged by Tvastr, splits open his head, and frees the waters, which pour into the sea "like
bellowing cows" (RV 1.32).
The battle of a god against an ophidian or marine monster is well known to constitute a widespread
mythological theme. We need only remember the struggle between Re and Apophis, between the
Sumerian god Ninurta and Asag, Marduk and Tiamat, the Hittite storm god and the serpent Illuyankas,
Zeus and Typhon, the Iranian hero Thraetona and the three-headed dragon Azhi-dahaka. In certain cases
(Marduk-Tiamat, for example) the god's victory constitutes the preliminary condition for the
cosmogony. In other cases the stake is the inauguration of a new era or the establishment of a new
sovereignty (cf. Zeus-Typhon, Baal-Yam). In short, it is by the slaying of an ophidian monster - symbol
of the virtual, of "chaos," but also of the "autochthonous" - that a new cosmic or institutional "situation"
comes into existence. A characteristic feature, and one common to all these myths, is the fright, or a first
defeat, of the champion (Marduk and Re hesitate before fighting; at the onset, the serpent Illyunakas
succeeds in mutilating the god; Typhon succeeds in cutting and carrying off Zeus's tendons). According
to the Satapatha Brahmana (1.6.3-17), Indra, on first seeing Vrtra, runs away as far as possible, and the
Markandeya Purana describes him as "sick with fear" and hoping for peace.272
It would serve no purpose to dwell on the naturalistic interpretations of this myth; the victory over
Vrtra has been seen either as rain brought on by a thunderstorm or as the freeing of the mountain waters
(Oldenberg) or as the triumphs of the sun over the cold that had "imprisoned" the waters by freezing
them (Hillebrandt). Certainly, naturalistic elements are present, since the myth is multivalent; Indra's
victory is equivalent, among other things, to the truimph of life over the sterility and death resulting
from the immobilization of the waters by Vrtra. But the structure of the myth is cosmogonic. In Rig
Veda 1.33.4 it is said that, by his victory, the god created the sun, the sky, and dawn. According to
another hymn (RV 10.113.4-6) Indra, as soon as he was born, separated the Sky from the Earth, fixed
the celestial vault, and hurling the vajra, tore apart Vrtra, who was holding the waters captive in the
darkness. Now, Sky and Earth are the parents of the gods (1.185.6); Indra is the youngest (3.38.1) and
also the last god to be born, because he put an end to the hierogamy [mystical union] of Sky and Earth:
"By his strength, he spread out these two worlds, Sky and Earth, and caused the sun to shine." (8.3.6).
117 
After this demiurgic feat, Indra appointed Varuna cosmocrator and guardian of rta (which had remained
concealed in the world below; 1.62.1).
...there are other types of Indian cosmogonies that explain the creation of the world from a materia
prima. This is not the case with the myth we have just summarized, for here a certain type of "world"
already existed. For Sky and Earth were formed and had engendered the gods. Indra only separated the
cosmic parents, and, by hurling the vajra at Vrtra, he put an end to the immobility, or even the
"virtuality," symbolized by the dragon's mode of being. [Indra comes across Vrtra "not divided, not
awake, plunged in the deepest sleep, stretched out" (RV 4.19.3)]. According to certain traditions, the
"fashioner" of the gods, Tvastr, whose role is not clear in the Rig Veda, had built himself a house and
created Vrtra as a sort of roof, but also as walls, for his habitation. Inside this dwelling, encircled by
Vrtra, Sky, Earth and the Waters existed. Indra bursts asunder this primordial monad by breaking the
"resistance" and inertia of Vrtra. In other words, the world and life could not come to birth except by the
slaying of an amorphous Being. In countless variants, this myth is quite widespread...."

The Uroboros - Precosmogonic Dragon of Chaos
The primordial theriomorphic serpent-god is endless potential; is whatever comprises being prior to the
emergence of the capacity for experience. This potential has been represented as the self-devouring dragon
(most commonly) because this image (portrayed in Figure 29: The Uroboros - Precosmogonic Dragon of
Chaos 274) aptly symbolizes the union of incommensurate opposites. The uroboros is simultaneously
representative of two antithetical primordial elements. As a snake, the uroboros is a creature of the ground,
of matter; as a bird (a winged animal), it is a creature of the air, of the sky, of spirit. The uroboros
symbolizes the union of known (associated with spirit) and unknown (associated with matter), explored and
118 



unexplored; symbolizes the juxtaposition of the "masculine" principles of security, tyranny and order with
the "feminine" principles of darkness, dissolution, creativity and chaos. Furthermore, as a snake, the
uroboros has the capacity to shed its skin - to be "reborn." Thus, it also represents the possibility of
transformation, and stands for the knower, who can transform chaos into order, and order into chaos. The
uroboros stands for, or constitutes, everything that is as of yet unencountered, prior to its differentiation as
a consequence of active exploration and classification. It is the source of all the information that makes up
the determinate world of experience - and is, simultaneously, the birth-place of the experiencing subject.
The uroboros is one thing, as everything that has not yet been explored is one thing; it exists
everywhere, and at all times. It is completely self-contained, completely self-referential: it feeds, fertilizes
and engulfs itself. It unites the beginning and the end, being and becoming, in the endless circle of its
existence. It serves as symbol for the ground of reality itself. It is the "set of all things that are not yet
things" - the primal origin and ultimate point of return for every discriminable object, and every
independent subject. It serves as progenitor of all we know, all that we don't know, and of the spirit that
constitutes our capacity to know - and not know. It is the mystery that constantly emerges when solutions
to old problems cause new problems; is the sea of chaos surrounding man's island of knowledge - and the
source of that knowledge, as well. It is all new experience generated by time, which incessantly works to
transform the temporarily predictable once again into the unknown. It has served mankind as the most
ubiquitous and potent of primordial gods:
"This is the ancient Egyptian symbol of which it is said, "Draco interfecit se ipsum, maritat se ipsum,
impraegnat se ipsum." It slays, weds, and impregnates itself. It is man and woman, begetting and
conceiving, devouring and giving birth, active and passive, above and below, at once.
As the Heavenly Serpent, the uroboros was known in ancient Babylon; in later times, in the same
area, it was often depicted by the Mandaeans; its origin is ascribed by Macrobius to the Phoenicians. It
is the archetype of the [greek phrase], the All One, appearing as Leviathan and as Aion, as Oceanus, and
also as the Primal Being that says "I am Alpha and Omega." As the Kneph of antiquity it is the Primal
Snake, the "most ancient deity of the prehistoric world." The uroboros can be traced in the Revelation of
St. John and among the Gnostics as well as among the Roman syncretists; there are pictures of it in the
sand paintings of the Navajo Indians and in Giotto; it is found in Egypt, Africa, Mexico, and India,
among the gypsies as an amulet, and in the alchemical texts."5
The uroboros is Tiamat, the dragon who inhabits the deep, transformed by Marduk into the world;
Apophis, the serpent who nightly devours the sun; and Rahab, the leviathan, slain by Yahweh in the course
of the creation of the cosmos:
Canst thou draw out leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord which thou lettest down?
Canst thou put an hook into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a thorn?
Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft words unto thee?
Will he make a covenant with thee? wilt thou take him for a servant for ever?
Wilt thou play with him as with a bird? or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens?
Shall the companions make a banquet of him? shall they part him among the merchants?
Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish spears?
Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle, do no more.
Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not one be cast down even at the sight of him?
None is so fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand before me?
Who hath prevented me, that I should repay him? whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine.
I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion.
Who can discover the face of his garment? or who can come to him with his double bridle?
Who can open the doors of his face? his teeth are terrible round about.
His scales are his pride, shut up together as with a close seal.
One is so near to another, that no air can come between them.
They are joined one to another, they stick together, that they cannot be sundered.
By his neesings a light doth shine, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.
Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out.
119 




Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, as out of a seething pot or caldron.
His breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth out of his mouth.
In his neck remaineth strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before him.
The flakes of his flesh are joined together: they are firm in themselves; they cannot be moved.
His heart is as firm as a stone; yea, as hard as a piece of the nether millstone.
When he raiseth up himself, the mighty are afraid: by reason of breakings they purify themselves.
The sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold: the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon.
He esteemeth iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.
The arrow cannot make him flee: slingstones are turned with him into stubble.
Darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear.
Sharp stones are under him: he spreadeth sharp pointed things upon the mire.
He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he maketh the sea like a pot of ointment.
He maketh a path to shine after him; one would think the deep to be hoary.
Upon earth there is not his like, who is made without fear.
He beholdeth all high things: he is a king over all the children of pride. (Job 41:1-34).
The uroboros is that which exists as pure unqualified potential, prior to the manifestation of such
potential, in the experience of the limited subject; is the infinite possibility for sudden dramatic
unpredictability that still resides in the most thoroughly explored and familiar of objects (things, other
people, ourselves). That unpredictability is not mere material possibility or potential; it is also meaning.
The domain of chaos - which is where what to do has not yet been specified - is a "place" characterized by
the presence of potent emotions, discouragement, depression, fear; a place characterized by rootlessness,
loss and disorientation. It is the affective aspect of chaos that constitutes what is most clearly known about
chaos. It is "darkness, drought, the suspension of norms, and death."6 It is the terror of the dark of night,
which fills itself with demons of the imagination, yet exerts an uncanny fascination; it is the fire that
magically reduces one determinate thing to another; it is the horror and curiosity engendered by the
stranger and foreigner.
The urubobos - the primordial matrix - contains in "embryonic" form everything that can in principle
possibly be experienced, and the thing that does the experiencing. The great serpent (the matrix) is
therefore consciousness - spirit, before it manifests itself - and matter, before it is separated from spirit.
This great mythological idea finds its echo in certain modern theories of the development of the subject;
most particularly, among those entitled constructivist. The famous Swiss developmental psychologist Jean
Piaget claimed, for example, that the experiencing subject constructs himself in infancy, as a consequence
of his exploratory activity.277 He acts, and observes himself acting; then imitates the action, forming a
primordial representation of himself - later, formulates a more abstracted model of his own actions. Thus
the subject is created from the information generated in the course of exploratory activity.
Contemporaneously, the world comes into being:
Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be meat to the people inhabiting the
wilderness.
Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty rivers.
The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou has prepared the light and the sun.
Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer and winter. (Psalms 74:14-17).
Actions have consequences. The consequences of actions constitute the world - the familiar world,
when they are predictable; the world of the unexpected, when they are not.
The "state" of the origin has been represented most abstractly as a circle, the most "perfect" of
geometric forms, or as a sphere, without beginning or end, symmetrical across all axes. Plato, in the
Timaeus, described the primary source as the round, there at the beginning.278 In the Orient, the world and
its meanings springs from the encircled interplay and union of the light, spiritual, masculine yang, and the
dark, material, feminine, yin.
279 According to the adepts of medieval alchemy, discernible objects of
experience (and the subjects who experienced them) emerged from the round chaos, which was a spherical
container of the primordial element.280 The God of Islam, Judaism and Christianity, "Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end, the first and the last" (Revelations 22:13), places himself outside of or beyond
120 

?
????
??????
???????
????? ????
????
??????

worldly change, and unites the temporal opposites within the great circle of his being. The assimilation of
the origin to a circle finds narrative echo in myths describing Heaven as the end to which life is, or should
be, devoted (at least from the perspective of the "immortal soul.") The Kingdom of God, promised by
Christ, is in fact re-establishment of Paradise (although a Paradise characterized by reconciliation of
opposing forces, and not regressive dissolution, into preconscious unity). Such re-establishment closes the
circle of temporal being.
The uroboric initial state is the "place" where all opposite things were (will be) united; the great selfdevouring
dragon whose division into constituent elements constitutes the precondition for experience
itself. This initial state is a "place" free of problems, and has a paradisal aspect, in consequence; however,
the price that must be paid for uroboric paradise is being itself. It is not until the original unity of all things
is broken up - until the most primordial of gods is murdered - that existence itself springs into being. The
emergence of things, however, brings with it the problem of opposites - a problem that must be solved,
optimally, without eliminating the fact of existence itself.

Figure 30: The Birth of the World Parents
The uroboros is the unified parent of the known, the Great Father (explored territory and the familiar),
and of the unknown, the Great Mother (anomalous information and the unpredictable). It might be
regarded, as well, as the single androgynous grandparent of the hero, son of the night and the day, mediator
between the known and unknown, whose being constitutes a necessary precondition for the existence of
differentiated things (and who can, therefore, also be regarded as a causa prima). The world parents, Earth
and Sky, emerge when the uroboric dragon undergoes a first division. Figure 30: The Birth of the World
Parents presents the "birth of the world" in schematic form, insofar as it has been conceptualized by the
mythic imagination. The chaos that constitues totality divides itself into what has been explored, and what
has yet to be explored.
From the mythic perspective, this division is equivalent to the emergence of the cosmos - and, therefore,
to creation or genesis itself. One thing is missing - the fact of the explorer, and the nature of his
121 

relationship with what is known and what has yet to be known. With the "birth" of the explorer - with his
construction from the interplay between culture and nature - the entire "world" comes into being. This
"emergence of experience" is portrayed in Figure 31: The Constituent Elements of the World, in
Dynamic Relationship. The "knower" is simultaneously child of nature and culture, creator of culture (as a
consequence of his encounter with nature or the unknown world) and the "person" for whom the unknown
is a reality.

Figure 31: The Constituent Elements of the World, in Dynamic Relationship
It is almost impossible to overestimate the degree to which the "world parent" schema of categorization
colors (or, alternatively, has been derived from) fundamental human presumption and activity. The "world"
is explored territory, surrounded by mystery; that mystery is experienced as undifferentiated but oftmenacing
chaos. Everything that "occupies" such chaos is directly perceived as (not abstractly
conceptualized as) identical to it - is directly perceived as unknown and anxiety-provoking. The foreigner,
therefore - the occupant of the "habitation of dragons" (Isaiah 34:13) - is naturally apprehended as an
agent of formless chaos. Eliade states:
"One of the outstanding characteristics of traditional societies is the opposition that they assume
between their inhabited world and the unknown and indeterminate space that surrounds it. The former is
the world (more precisely, our world), the cosmos; everything outside it is no longer a cosmos but a sort
of "other world," a foreign, chaotic space, peopled by ghosts, demons, "foreigners" (who are assimilated
to [undistinguished from, more accurately] the demons and the souls of the dead).281
Everything outside occupies the same categorical space as the dragon of chaos, or the terrible mother. The
early Indo-Europeans equated the destruction of enemies in battle to the slaying of Vrtra by Indra;282 the
122 


ancient Egyptians regarded the Hyksos, "barbarians," as equivalent to Apophis, the serpent who nightly
devours the sun;283 and the archaic Iranians (Zoroastrians) equated the mythic struggle of King Faridun
against a foreign usurper - the dragon Azdahak - with the cosmogonic fight of the hero Thraetona against
Azi Dahaka, the primordial serpent of chaos.284 The enemies of the Old Testament Hebrews also suffer the
same fate: they are regarded as equivalent to Rahab, or Leviathan, the serpent overcome by Yahweh in his
battle to establish the world ["Speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee,
Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great dragon that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which hath said, My river is
mine own, and I have made it for myself." (Ezekiel 29:3); also, "Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath
devoured me, he hath crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a
dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath cast me out." (Jeremiah 51:34)]. Eliade
continues:
"At first sight this cleavage in space appears to be due to the opposition between an inhabited and
organized - hence cosmicized - territory and the unknown space that extends beyond its frontiers; on
one side there is a cosmos, on the other a chaos. But we shall see that if every inhabited territory is a
cosmos, this is precisely because it was first consecrated, because, in one way or another, it is the work
of the gods or is in communication with the world of the gods. The world (that is, our world) is a
universe within which the sacred has already manifested itself, in which, consequently, the breakthrough
from plane to plane has become possible and repeatable. It is not difficult to see why the
religious moment implies the cosmogonic moment. The sacred reveals absolute reality and at the same
time makes orientation possible; hence it founds the world in the sense that it fixes the limits and
establishes the order of the world.
All this appears very clearly from the Vedic ritual for taking possession of a territory; possession
becomes legally valid through the erection of a fire altar consecrated to Agni. "One says that one is
installed when one has built a fire altar (garhapatya) and all those who build the fire altar are legally
established." (Shatapatha Brahmana, VII, 1,1,1-4). By the erection of a fire altar Agni is made present,
and communication with the world of the gods is ensured; the space of the altar becomes a sacred space.
But the meaning of the ritual is far more complex, and if we consider all of its ramifications, we shall
understand why consecrating a territory is equivalent to making it a cosmos, to cosmicizing it. For, in
fact, the erection of an altar to Agni is nothing but the reproduction - on the microcosmic scale - of the
Creation. The water in which the clay is mixed is assimilated to the primordial water; the clay that forms
the base of the altar symbolizes the earth; the lateral walls represent the atmosphere, and so on. And the
building of the altar is accompanied by songs that proclaim which cosmic region has just been created
(Shatapatha Brahmana I, 9, 2, 29, etc.). Hence the erection of a fire altar - which alone validates taking
possession of a new territory - is equivalent to a cosmogony.
An unknown, foreign and unoccupied territory (which often means "unoccupied by our people") still
shares in the fluid and larval modality of chaos. By occupying it and, above all, by settling in it, man
symbolically transforms it into a cosmos through a ritual repetition of the cosmogony. What is to
become "our world" must first be "created," and every creation has a paradigmatic model - the creation
of the universe by the gods. When the Scandinavian colonists took possession of Iceland (land-nama)
and cleared it, they regarded the enterprise neither as an original undertaking nor as human and profane
work. For them, their labor was only repetition of a primordial act, the transformation of chaos into
cosmos by the divine act of creation. When they tilled the desert soil, they were in fact repeating the act
of the gods who had organized chaos by giving it a structure, forms, and norms.
Whether it is a case of clearing uncultivated ground or of conquering and occupying a territory
already inhabited by "other" human beings, ritual taking possession must always repeat the cosmogony.
For in the view of archaic societies everything that is not "our world" is not yet a world. A territory can
be made ours only by creating it anew, that is, by consecrating it. This religious behavior in respect to
unknown lands continued, even in the West, down to the dawn of modern times [and was reflected
recently in the "planting of the flag" on the moon, by the American astronauts.] The Spanish and
Portuguese conquistadors, discovering and conquering territories, took possession of them in the name
of Jesus Christ [the world-creating Logos]."85
123 







A similar form of ritual and ideation dominates processes even as "simple" as the establishment of a
new building. In India,
"... before a single stone is laid, 'The astrologer shows what spot in the foundation is exactly above the
head of the snake that supports the world. The mason fashions a little wooden peg from the wood of the
Khadira tree, and with a coconut drives the peg into the ground at this particular spot, in such a way as
to peg the head of the snake securely down.... If this snake should ever shake its head really violently, it
would shake the world to pieces.'286 A foundation stone is placed above the peg. The cornerstone is thus
situated exactly at the "center of the world." But the act of foundation at the same time repeats the
cosmogonic act, for to "secure" the snake's head, to drive the peg into it, is to imitate the primordial
gesture of Soma (Rig Veda II, 12, 1) or of Indra when the latter "smote the Serpent in his lair (Rig Veda,
VI, 17, 9), when his thunderbolt "cut off his head (Rig Veda I, 52, 10)."87
Order - explored territory - is constructed out of chaos and exists, simultaneously, in opposition to that
chaos (to the "new" chaos, more accurately: to the unknown now defined in opposition to explored
territory). Everything that is not order - that is, not predictable, not usable - is, by default (by definition)
chaos. The foreigner - whose behaviors cannot be predicted, who is not kin, either by blood or by custom,
who is not an inhabitant of the "cosmos," whose existence and domain has not been sacralized - is
equivalent to chaos (and not merely metaphorically equated with chaos). As such, his appearance means
threat, as his action patterns and beliefs have the capacity to upset society itself - have the capacity to
dissolve and flood the world, and reinstitute the dominion of the uroboros.
2.3.4. The Great Mother: Images of the Unknown, or Unexplored Territory
"The Mother of Songs, the mother of our whole seed, bore us in the beginning. She is the mother of all
races of men and the mother of all tribes. She is the mother of the thunder, the mother of the rivers, the
mother of trees and of all kinds of things. She is the mother of songs and dances. She is the mother of the
older brother stones. She is the mother of the grain and the mother of all things. She is the mother of the
younger brother Frenchmen and of the strangers. She is the mother of the dance paraphernalia and of all
temples, and the only mother we have. She is the mother of the animals, the only one, and the mother of the
Milky Way. It was the mother herself who began to baptize. She gave us the limestone coca dish. She is the
mother of the rain, the only one we have. She alone is the mother of all things, she alone. And the mother
has left a memory in all the temples. With her sons, the saviors, she left songs and dances as a reminder.
Thus the priests, the fathers, and the older brothers have reported."88
Representation of culture, the known, is simple, comparatively; is second-order abstraction, depiction of
that which has already been made subject to order. Representation of culture is encapsulation of that to
which behavioral adaptation has previously occurred; of those things or situations whose sensory
properties, affective implications and motivational significances have been and are presently specified.
Representation of the knower, the human subject, is also depiction of that which is constantly encountered,
in all interpersonal interactions, and in all self-conscious states: is portrayal of those aspects of an infinitely
complex set of data which have at least been experienced, if not exhausted. Representation of the unknown,
however, appears impossible - appears as a contradiction in terms. How can what has not yet been
encountered be comprehended, understood, embodied, faced, or adapted to? But what has not been
encountered must be comprehended. The range of our experience continually supersedes the domain of our
determinate knowledge. We are therefore prone to constant contact with the unknown. It appears every
time we make an error; every time our presumptions are wrong - every time our behaviors do not produce
the consequences we expect and desire. The absence of specific depiction, appropriate to inexplicable
circumstance, does not alleviate the necessity of appropriate action - even though the nature of that action
cannot yet be specified. This means that the nature of the unknown, as such, must become represented, in
order to design action patterns, which are broadly suited for response to what cannot yet (and cannot
eternally) be predicted or controlled. We are in fact capable of a set of paradoxical abilities: we know what
124 








to do, when we do not know what to do; we know how to represent what to do, when we do not know what
to do; finally, we know how to represent what we have not yet encountered. These adaptive capacities -
impossible, at first glance - immensely further our capacity to behave, successfully, in the face of our
mysterious experience, and to communicate and broaden that capacity.
If an error in judgment, interpretation or behavior occurs, and something unexpected appears, that
unexpected thing has identifiable properties: it is dangerous, and promising. The danger is potential for
punishment, for frustration, for disappointment, for social isolation, for physical damage - even for death.
Every moment of threat, however, is simultaneously a moment of opportunity. The change that upsets the
presently predictable and orderly also means potential for advancement into a more promising future. The
unexpected is information itself, information necessary for the constant expansion of adaptive competence.
Such information comes packaged in threat and promise. To gain the information promised, the threat must
be overcome. This process of necessary eternal overcoming constantly constructs and transforms our
behavioral repertoires and representational schemas.
Everything presently known about the subject and objects of human experience was at one time merely
the undifferentiated unknown - which was far more than what yet remained to be discovered about the
collectively apprehensible sensory qualities of the world. The unknown may manifest itself in the
consensually validatable empirical realm, as an aspect of the material world; likewise, it may appear as new
significance, where none was evident before. What is known and familiar poses no threat - and offers no
possibility beyond that which has been previously determined. The explored thing or situation has been
associated with behaviors that render it beneficial, in the ideal, or at least irrelevant. The omnipresent
unknown, by contrast, presents threat and promise infinite in scope, impossible to encapsulate, equally
impossible to ignore. The unknown, unexpected, or unpredictable is the source of all conditional
knowledge - and the place that such knowledge "returns" to, so to speak, when it is no longer useful.
Everything we know, we know because someone explored something they did not understand - explored
something they were afraid of, in awe of. Everything we know, we know because someone generated
something valuable, in the course of an encounter with the unexpected.
"Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without
thinking about them."89 All things that we know no longer demand our attention. To know something is to
do it automatically, without thinking, to categorize it at a glance (or less than a glance), or to ignore it
entirely. The nervous system is "designed" to eliminate predictability from consideration, and to focus
limited analytical resources where focus would produce useful results. We attend to the places where
change is occurring; where something is happening that has not yet been modeled, where something is
happening that has not yet had behaviors erected around it - where something is happening that is not yet
understood. Consciousness itself might be considered as that "organ" which specializes in the analysis and
classification of unpredictable events. Attention and concentration naturally gravitate to those elements in
the experiential field that contain the highest concentration of novelty, or that are the least expected, prior
to what might normally be considered higher cognitive processing. The nervous system responds to
irregular change, and eliminates regularity. There is limited information, positive and negative, in the
predictable. The novel occurrence, by contrast, might be considered a window into the "transcendent
space" where reward and punishment exist, in eternal and unlimited potential.
The unknown or unexpected or novel appears when plans go wrong: when behavioral adaptation or
interpretive schema fails to produce what is desired or to predict what occurs. The appearance of the
unexpected or unpredictable inhibits ongoing goal-directed activity, in the absence of conscious volition.
Concurrently with this inhibition of activity comes inexorable redirection of attention towards the
unexpected event. The unexpected grips behavior, and spontaneously generates antithetical affects, varying
in intensity with the improbability of the occurrence, creating heightened interest, fear, intense curiosity, or
outright terror. This motivational significance appears to have been experienced as an intrinsic feature of
the unknown, prior to the strict formal modern division of experiential world into empirical object and
subjective observer - and is still fundamentally experienced in that manner today. Rudolf Otto, in his
seminal investigation into the nature of religious experience, described such experience as numinous,290 as
involuntarily gripping, as indicative of significance beyond the normal and average. The "numinous"
experience has two aspects: mysterium tremendum, which is capacity to invoke trembling and fear; and
mysterium fascinans - capacity to powerfully attract, fascinate, and compel. This numinous power, divine
125 









import, is extreme affective relevance and concomitant direction of behavior by the (unknown) object. This
"power" is commonly considered by those subject to it as a manifestation of God, personification of the
unknown, and ultimate source of all conditional knowledge:
"The feeling of it may at times come sweeping like a gentle tide, pervading the mind with a tranquil
mood of deepest worship. It may pass over into a more set and lasting attitude of the soul, continuing, as
it were, thrillingly vibrant and resonant, until at last it dies away and the soul resumes its 'profane,' nonreligious
mood of everyday experience. It may burst in sudden eruptions up from the depths of the soul
with spasms and convulsions, or lead to the strangest excitements, to intoxicated frenzy, to transport,
and to ecstasy. It has its wild and demonic forms and can sink to an almost grisly horror and shuddering.
It has its crude, barbaric antecedents and early manifestations, and again it may be developed into
something beautiful and pure and glorious. It may become the hushed, trembling, and speechless
humility of the creature in the presence of - whom or what? In the presence of that which is a mystery
inexpressible and above all creatures."91
Nothing that is not represented can be said to be understood - not as we normally use that term.
Nonetheless, understanding of the unknown - which cannot, in theory, be represented - is vital to
continued survival. Desire to represent the unknown, to capture its essence, is in consequence potent:
potent enough to drive the construction of culture, the net that constrains the unknowable source of all
things. The impetus for representation of the domain of the unexpected arose (and arises) as consequence of
the intrinsic, biologically-determined affective or emotional significance of the unknown or novel world.
Representations of the unknown constitute attempts to elaborate upon its nature, to illuminate its emotional
and motivational significance (to illuminate its being, from the prescientific or mythic perspective). This is
categorization of all that has not yet been explored and represented, in the service of adaptation to that
which has not yet been understood. This is the attempt to formulate a conception of "the category of all asof-yet
uncategorized things," so that a useful stance might be adopted, with regards to that category.
The novel ceaselessly inspires thought, and allows itself to be entangled, yet inevitably transcends all
attempts at final classification. The unknown therefore provides a constant powerful source of "energy" for
exploration and the generation of new information. Desire to formulate a representation of that which
supersedes final classification and remains eternally motivating might well be understood as a prepotent
and irresistible drive. That drive constitutes what might be regarded as the most fundamental religious
impulse - constitutes the culturally universal attempt to define and establish a relationship with God - and
underlies the establishment of civilized historical order. The product of this drive, the culturally-constructed
complex, extant in fantasy - the symbol, composed of communicable representation of all things constantly
threatening and promising to man - affects and structures the experience of each individual, yet remains
impersonal, distinct and separate:
"The living symbol formulates an essential unconscious factor, and the more widespread this factor is,
the more general is the effect of the symbol, for it touches a corresponding chord in every psyche. Since,
for a given epoch, it is the best possible expression for what is still unknown, it must be the product of
the most complex and differentiated minds of that age. But in order to have an effect at all, it must
embrace what is common to a large group of men. This can never be what is most differentiated, the
highest attainable, for only a very few attain to that or understand it. The common factor must be
something that is still so primitive that its ubiquity cannot be doubted. Only when the symbol embraces
that and expresses it in the highest possible form is it of general efficacy. Herein lies the potency of the
living, social symbol and its redeeming power."92
This dynamic representation might comprise part of the subjective experience of a myriad of people, and
therefore have its "own" biologically grounded, culturally-determined existence, independent of any given
person at any given time - even to follow its own intrinsic rules of development - yet fail to exist
"objectively," as the objective is currently understood.
Ritualized, dramatic or mythic representations of the unknown - the domain that emerges when error is
committed - appear to have provided the initial material for the most primordial and fundamental aspects
of formalized religions. Appreciation of the nature of the unknown as a category developed as a
126 







consequence of observation of our inherent response to what we did not expect, manifested as predictable
pattern of affect and behavior: fear and curiosity, terror and hope, inhibition of ongoing activity and
cautious exploration, "habituation" and generation of novel and situation-specific appropriate behavioral
strategies. Two things are the same, from the empirical viewpoint, if they share collectively apprehended
sensory features. Two things are the same, from the metaphoric, dramatic, or mythical perspective - from
the perspective of the natural category - if they produce the same subjective state of being (affect or
motivation), or have the same functional status (which is implication for behavior). Experiences that share
affective tone appear categorizable in single complexes, symbolic in nature (from the standpoint of abstract
cognition) - products of culture, which evolved in the social environment characteristic of ancestral homo
sapiens, and later, disappeared. Such complexes might play a useful role, in the promotion of general
adaptive behavior, in the face of feared and promising objects, in the absence of detailed explorationgenerated
information, regarding the explicit nature of these objects.
These representations might be considered the consequence of first level representation - of imitation, as
Piaget pointed out - and then, later, the consequence of more abstracted second-order representation (of
symbolic understanding). Understanding can be reached, at the most inclusive, yet primary level, through
ritual and mimesis. An unknown phenomenon, gripping but incomprehensible, can yet be represented
ritually, can be acted out. Secondary representation of this "acting-out" constitutes the initial form of
abstract representation. To understand the lion, for example - or the hunted beast - it is first necessary to
"become" the lion, or the hunted beast - to mimic, physically, and later to represent the mimicry in
imagination. It is in this manner that the son imitates the father, who he will later become. A child's
embodiment of the parent means his incorporation of the knowledge of the parent, at least insofar as that
knowledge is action. The child acts out his father, without understanding him - and without understanding
the reasons for his acting out. It could be said, therefore - metaphorically speaking - that the imitating child
is possessed by the spirit of the father, like the father was possessed before him, in his period of childhood.
The "spirit of the father" may be conceived, in this representational schema, as an entity independent of the
particular father, or the particular son - as something that manifests itself in imagination and in possession
of behavior generation after generation, in more-or-less constant and traditional form. Similarly, the
unknown, which might be considered object and subject simultaneously - which manifests itself in the
perceptible world, in affect, and which grips behavior - might well be regarded as (or manifest itself in
imagination as) a transpersonal entity (or as the result of the actions of a transpersonal entity). The ancestral
"primordial hunter," terrified by something unknown in the bush, portrays his encounter with what
frightened him by "acting out" the unknown demon, when he returns to the village. This "acting out" is
simultaneously embodiment and representation - is basic-level hypothesis regarding the nature of the
unknown, as such. Alternatively, perhaps, he fashions an image, an idol, of the thing - and gives concrete
form to what until then is merely behavioral compulsion. The unknown first appears, symbolically - so to
speak - as an independent personality, when it cannot be conceived of in any other fashion, and later
appears as if it were a personality (in evidently metaphoric guise). Evidence for the adoption of
"personality" by representational or quasi-representational "complexes" is plentiful. 293 Such "complexes"
may "construct themselves" over the course of many centuries, as a consequence of the exploratory and
creative endeavors of many disparate individuals, united within the communicative network of culture.
It is in this manner, over vast stretches of time, that the "transpersonal" domain of the imagination
becomes populated with "spirits." Jung described the "space" occupied by such "spirits" as the pleroma (a
gnostic term).294 The pleroma might be described as the subjective world of experience, in remembrance -
the episodic world, perhaps, from the perspective of modern memory theory - although representations
apparently collectively apprehensible under certain peculiar circumstances [like those of the Virgin Mary,
in Yugoslavia, prior to the devastating Serbian-Bosnian-Muslim war, or those of "alien spaceships"
(UFO's) during the cold war] also make their "home" there. The pleroma is the "space" in which heaven
and hell have their existence; the place where Plato's "supra-celestial" ideals reside, the ground of dream
and fantasy. It appears to have a four-dimensional structure, like that of objective space-time (and of
memory 295), but is characterized by a tremendous vagueness with regards to category and temporality. The
"spirits" which inhabit the pleroma, in its "natural" condition, are deities - undifferentiated mixes of
subject and object, motivational significance and sensory aspect, elaborated into personified representations
by the efforts of many. This is merely to say that a representation is a social construct, with historical (even
127 







biological) roots - like any idea - and that the spirit who inhabits the imagination is not necessarily a
figment created by the person who "has" that imagination. The devil is not the product of the particular
Christian. It is more accurate to note that the figure of the devil - or of Christ, for that matter - inhabits the
mind of the Christian (and of all Christians), and that such habitation occurs as a consequence of
transpersonal social and historical processes, operating almost completely beyond the realm of individual
control. 296 The child, similarly, can not be said to create the monsters that inhabit his imagination. They
"grow" there, so to speak, and are then "subjectively" observed - are "fed" by casual statements on the part
of adults, by action patterns the child observes but cannot explain, by emotions and motivational states that
emerge suddenly and unpredictably, by the fantasies in books, on TV, and in the theater.
Events or experiences that remain beyond the reach of exploration, assimilation and accomodation stay
firmly entrenched in or automatically ascribed to the domain of the unknown, threatening and promising.
The category of all events that cannot yet be categorized can nonetheless be modelled, through metaphoric
application of partially comprehensible yet affect-inducing occurrences, whose emotional relevance in
some way matches that of the unknown. Each of the specific things that signifies danger, for example - or,
alternatively, the enhancement of life - appears easily associated with every other specific thing,
characterized by the same property, as well as with novelty itself, which produces fear and hope as part of
its (subjectively) intrinsic nature. These experiences appear inter-associated on the basis of the similar
affective or behavioral states they inspire - on the basis of the motivational effects they engender, prior to
development of "habituation" in course of exploratory behavior.297 The archaic "limbic system" has its own
method of classification, so to speak, experienced privately as emotion - or as behavior spontaneously
undertaken - manifested outside the realm of conditional abstract culturally-determined presumption.298
Everything novel encountered, avoided because of involuntary or willfully manifested fear or ignorance, is
potentially or actively linked with all that remains outside of individual competence and/or cultural
classification. Everything that produces fear may be subjectively considered one aspect of the same
(subterranean) thing. What is that thing?
The unknown, as such, surrounds all things, but exists only in a hypothetical state, and finds
representation in symbolic form as the uroboros, as we have seen. The disintegration or division of the
uroboros gives rise to all things, including the disorder or unpredictability that is defined in opposition to
what has been explored. This more narrowly defined domain of disorder or unpredictability - which is the
unknown, as it is actually experienced (rather than as a hypothetical entity) - tends to be portrayed as
something distinctly feminine, as the daughter of the great serpent, as the matrix of all determinate being. It
is useful to regard the Great Mother as the primary agent of the serpent of chaos - as the serpent's
representative, so to speak, in the profane domain. The serpent of chaos can be seen lurking "behind" the
Great Mother, as we shall see, and she often "adopts" reptilian (material) or bird-like (spiritual) features.
This relationship is schematically represented in Figure 32: Novelty, the Great Mother, 299 as Daughter of
the Uroboros. In the incarnation depicted, the Great Mother is Venus, goddess of fertility and love. As the
winged mother - bird and matter - she is "spirit" and "earth" at once; the wings might just as easily be
replaced by the icon of a snake, which would tie her figure more closely to the earth (and to the idea of
transformation). The capsule that surrounds her, for example - frequently found enveloping Christ (as son
of the Divine Mother) or Mary (the Divine Mother herself) in late medieval and early Renaissance art - is
the mandorla, or vesica pisces, the "fishes' bladder," which appears to have served as sexual/symbolic
representation of the source of all things since well before written history began.300
The uroboros and the figure of the Great Mother commonly overlap because the "chaos comprising the
original state" is hard to distinguish from the "chaos defined in opposition to established order." Two things
that have no distinguishable features (as is the case for the "two domains of chaos") are difficult to separate
from one another. The distinctions between the figures of the uroboros and the Great Mother are just as
important as their similarities, however. An immense difference obtains between the possibility of
something unknown, and an actual unknown (the difference between potential and reality). Eliade provides
an example of a careful attempt to disentangle the categories, drawn from Lao-Tzu:
"In another cosmogonic fragment (chap. 25),. the Tao is denominated 'an undifferentiated and perfect
being, born before Heaven and Earth.... We can consider it the Mother of this world, but I do not know
its name; I will call it Tao; and if it must be named, its name will be: the Immense (ta).' The
128 

'undifferentiated and perfect' being is interpreted by a commentator of the second century B.C. thus:
'the mysterious unity [Hung-t'ung] of Heaven and Earth chaotically [hun-tun] constitutes [the condition]
of the uncarved block.' Hence the Tao is a primordial totality, living and creative but formless and
nameless. 'That which is nameless is the origin of Heaven and Earth. That which has a name is the
Mother of the ten thousand beings'...."
Figure 32: Novelty, the Great Mother
The unknown, as such, is the thing "in and of itself." By contrast, the unknown as encountered (by a
determinate subject, in a particular situation) is the matrix of all being - the actual source of information
that, once explored and categorized, constitutes "cosmos" or order (and, for that matter, exploring agent).
Lao-Tzu also says - in an attempt to further clarify the situation:
"The divinity of the Valley does not die: it is the Obscure Female. The gate of the Obscure Female - that
is the origin of Heaven and Earth."02
The unknown appears to be generally conceptualized or symbolically represented as female primarily
because the female genitalia - hidden, private, unexplored, productive - serve as "gateway" or "portal" to
the "(divine) unknown world or source of creation," and therefore easily come to stand for that "place."
Novelty and femininity share analogical or categorical identity, from this perspective: both constitute a
window, so to speak, into the world "beyond." Woman, insofar as she is subject to natural demands, is not
merely a model for nature - she is divine nature, in imagination and actuality. She literally embodies the
129 






matrix of biological being, and provides, as such, an appropriate figure for the metaphoric modelling of the
ground of everything. The female body constitutes the border between normal experience and the totality
from which all forms emerge. Infants come from mothers; this hypothesis, based upon direct observation,
accounts for the provisional source of particular individuals. The origin, per se, partakes of the same
essential ineffable nature - partakes of whatever is characteristic of the (experienceable) mother, and of
other identifiable points of origin, which cannot be described or comprehended so easily (such as the caves
where ores "grow and mature," or the ground where crops thrive). The matrix of all things is something
feminine, like the mothers of experience; is something with an endlessly fecund and renewed (maternal and
virginal) nature - is something that defines fertility and, therefore, femininity itself. Things come from
somewhere; all things have their birthplace. The relationship of man writ large to nature, eternal mother,
endlessly mimics that of the particular child to his personal mother - or, to be more accurate, the child and
the mother mimic life and the world.
The unknown - as it can be encountered - is female; and female, with paradoxical qualities. The Great
and Terrible Mother of All Things promises endlessly; she also threatens, absolutely. The outcome of an
encounter with the unknown - which constitutes the necessary precondition for the generation of new
information (for generation of the "cosmos" and of the experiencing subject) - cannot be specified
beforehand; something new might benefit, or destroy. Femininity shares emotional valence with novelty
and threat - furthering the utility of the female as metaphoric grist - because of the union that exists within
experience between creation of one thing, and destruction and transformation of another.303 The processes
of embryogenesis itself requires that blood change form, as the fetus thrives on the "blood" of its mother.
The act of birth itself is traumatic, painful, dangerous, and frightening, recapitulating the natural theme of
creation, transformation and destruction. Nourishment is linked integrally with death and terror, even from
the beginning, when the metamorphosis of blood into milk transforms the mother into food for the infant.
Nature is feminine, in addition, because of the isomorphic relationship that exists between childhood
dependency on maternal beneficience and caprice, and adult subjugation to biological reality. Human
infants are prepared, instinctively, to establish relationship with the mother, and to respond with vitality to
manifestation of maternal interest. Every individual's primordial world-experience is experience of mother
- who is the world itself, in initial developmental stages (insofar as the world has any motivational
significance, whatsoever). (Indeed, for individuals who are sufficiently stunted in their psychological
development, the "world" never evolves into anything other than "mother."04) Furthermore, the
ontogenesis of the individual, and the mother-child symbiosis, is comparable to the phylogenesis of
humanity, and the relationship of that humanity with - or its dependence upon - earth and sea. The
archetypal infantile situation, which extends back into time, prior to the establishment of culture itself, is
recapitulated in adulthood, with the maternal object of fear and respect, hope, love and gratitude abstracted
into experience itself.
The threatening aspects of the Great Mother gather metaphoric representation as chimeras of anxietyproducing
places, animals, gestures, expressions and things. These elements - diverse from the objective
perspective (from the standpoint of the "proper set") - nonetheless unite to produce an image of the everpresent
potential danger inherent in anything unpredictable. The Great Mother - unexplored territory - is
the dark, the chaos of the night, the insect, ophidian and reptilian worlds, the damaged body, the mask of
anger or terror - the entire panoply of fear-inducing experiences, commonly encountered (and imagined) by
Homo sapiens. A dynamic complex of such objects appears as the most subtle and exact representation
imaginable of the unknown - something capable, simultaneously, of characterizing the active bite of the
snake, the life of fire, the sting of the scorpion, the trap of the spider - the most suitable embodiment of the
manifest desire of nature's vital transformative forces, generative of death, dissolution, destruction and
endless creation. Feared experiences, grounded in the inexplicable, acquire representation in fantasy, as
fear-producing spirits. These spirits, clothed in particular anxiety-provoking occurrences, give form to
aspects of experience that otherwise remain inexplicable - beyond understanding, from the perspective of
conditional adaptation, action, and abstract thought, but impossible to ignore, from the standpoint of affect.
The "personality" of such beings constitutes the embodiment of incomprehensible, and often intolerable,
motivational significance - comprises representation of the ground of violent emotional experience,
capable of inducing cognitive and behavioral possession, impossible to incorporate into the domain of
normal, culturally-established being. Figure 33: The Spontaneous Personification of Unexplored
130 




Territory presents one such figure, and its process of development, in comical form.305 Equivalent but more
serious dynamic representations of this type are deities, gods, borne of human experience, possessed of
quasi-objective transpersonal status - like the Word - manifestations of the unfamiliar, the other, the
unknown, and the unpredictable.
Figure 33: The Spontaneous Personification of Unexplored Territory
What can now be calmly described as an archaic symbol or god from the past may also reasonably be
considered as the manifestation of a primeval "independent" personality - the unified "embodiment" in
ritual or imagination of some set of phenomena united by their affective or functional equivalence. These
personalities - deities, to say it once again - have with time lost affective and conceptual relevance, as a
consequence of the constant expansion of human adaptive capacity, and have become "broken down" into
less complex, more determinate aspects of experience. In their original form, however, these
"representational personalities" revealed themselves within the creative, compensatory experience of
exceptional individuals, beset by their own incomprehensible (although not purely idiosyncratic) personal
tragedy. Concrete realization of such manifestation - transformation into an artistic production or potent
story, for example - involuntarily seized the attention of peers, and inspired a sense of fascination and awe.
Centuries-long cultural elaboration of such production gave rise to the elaborated "existence" of
transpersonal beings, of transcendent power, who inhabited the "space" defined by the collective
imagination of mankind, and who behaved in accordance with the dictates of their own irrational, myth131



predicated souls. These "representations" served as active images, detailing to everyone what was as of yet
explicitly unknown - only partially known; pointed the way towards aspects of experience beyond the
grasp of "conscious" abstract apprehension, but not safe to ignore.
It is no simple manner for the limited subject to formulate an accurate representation of the unlimited
unknown, of nature, the ground of existence. The unknown is the matrix of everything, the source of all
birth and the final place of rest. It hides behind our personal identity and our culture; it constantly
threatens and engenders all that we do, all that we understand, and all that we are. It can never be
eliminated permanently from consideration, since every solution merely provides the breeding place for a
host of new problems. The unknown is Homo sapiens' everlasting enemy and greatest friend, constantly
challenging individual facility for adaptation and representation, constantly pushing men and women to
greater depths and more profound heights. The unknown as Nature appears as paradoxical formidable
overwhelming power, applied simultaneously in one direction and its opposite. Hunger, the will to selfpreservation,
drives living creatures to devour each other rapaciously, and the hunters have no mercy for
the hunted. Sexuality bends the individual will inexorably and often tragically to the demand of the species,
and existence maintains itself in endless suffering, transformation and death. Life generates and destroys
itself in a pitiless cycle, and the individual remains constantly subject to forces beyond understanding or
control. The desire to exist permeates all that lives, and expresses itself in terrible fashion, in uncontrollable
impulse, in an endless counterpoint of fecundity and decay. The most basic, fundamental and necessary
aspects of experience are at the same time most dangerous and unacceptable.
Empirical (classical) "objects" are either one thing, or another. Nature, by contrast - the great unknown
- is one thing and its (affective) opposite at the same time, and in the same place. The novel, primeval
experience was (and remains) much too complex to be gripped, initially, by rational understanding, as
understood in the present day. Mythic imagination, "willing" to sacrifice discriminatory clarity for
inclusive phenomenological accuracy, provided the necessary developmental bridge. The earliest
embodiments of nature are therefore symbolic combinations of rationally irreconcilable attributes;
monsters, essentially feminine, who represent animal and human, creation and destruction, birth and
cessation of experience. The analytical psychologist Erich Neumann - who wrote a definitive,
comprehensive and useful book on the symbolism of the feminine - states:
"In the early phases of consciousness, the numinosity [that is, the emotional valence] of the archetype...
exceeds man's power of representation, so much so that at first no form can be given to it. And when
later the primordial archetype takes form in the imagination of man, its representations are often
monstrous and inhuman. This is the phase of the chimerical creatures composed of different animals or
of animal and man - the griffins, sphinxes, harpies, for example - and also of such monstrosities as
phallic and bearded mothers. It is only when consciousness learns to look at phenomena from a certain
distance, to react more subtly, to differentiate and distinguish [this is a function of exploration and its
related abstract processes], that the mixture of symbols prevailing in the primordial archetype separates
into the groups of symbols characteristic of a single archetype or of a group of related archetypes; in
short, that they became recognizable."06
The terrible aspects of the primordial Great Mother have been represented, symbolized, in variety of
manners, but her underlying reality and essential ideation remain immediately recognizable. Neumann
states:
"These figures are gruesomely alike. Their sheer frightfulness makes us hesitate, whether they represent
a skull, the head of a snake or hippopotamus, a face showing human likeness, or a head consisting of
two stone knives borne by a body pieced together from parts of snakes, panthers, lions, crocodiles, and
human beings. So great is the inhuman, extrahuman, and superhuman quality in this experience of dread
that man can visualize it only through phantoms. But all this - and it should not be forgotten - is an
image not only of the Feminine but particularly and specifically of the Maternal. For in a profound way
life and birth are always bound up with death and destruction. That is why this Terrible Mother is
"Great," and this name is also given to Ta-Urt, the gravid monster, which is hippopotamus and
crocodile, lioness and woman, in one. She too is deadly and protective. There is a frightening likeness to
132 




Hathor, the good cow goddess, who in the form of a hippopotamus is the goddess of the underworld.
She has a positive aspect, and at the same time she is the goddess of war and death....
In the course of the later307 development of patriarchal values, i.e., of the male deities of the sun and
light, the negative aspect of the Feminine was submerged. Tday it is discernible only as a content of the
primordial age, or of the unconscious. Thus the terrible Ta-Urt, as well as the terrible Hathor, Isis,
Neith,a and others, can be reconstituted from their pictures that have been "painted over," but cannot be
viewed directly. Only the monster Am-mit or Aman, which devours the souls condemned at the
judgment of the dead, points by its parallelism to the terrible aspect of Ta-Urt. Am-mit was described as
follows: "Her forepart (is that of) crocodiles, her hinderpart (is that of) hippopotamus, and her middle (is
that of a) lion." The feminine, animal-mother character of this many-breasted creature is evident as is
that of the monster wielding the terrible knife, which guards one of the underworld gates through which
the souls of the departed must pass.
Am-mit devours the souls that have not withstood the midnight judgment of the dead in the
underworld. But her role has become subordinate, for the religion of Osiris and Horus with its mysteries
has now promised rebirth and resurrection to all human souls, and not only, as originally, to the soul of
Pharaoh. The certainty of magical success in following the path of the sun, which is communicated to
each man after death by the priests, has overlaid the primordial fear represented by Am-mit. But
originally she was the terrible ancestral spirit of the matriarchal culture, in which the Feminine takes
back what has been born of it - just as among the primitive inhabitants of the Melanesian island of
Melekula or in the high culture of Mexico."08
The Terrible Mother challenges and threatens the individual, absolutely. She is goddess of anxiety,
depression, and psychological chaos - goddess of the possibility of pain and death. She is horror, insofar as
horror can be imagined, and is the ground of that horror, beyond. She exposes and turns to her advantage
constant mortal vulnerability. She barters, paradoxically, offering continuance of life for sacrificial death.
She demands reconciliation, without offering the certainty of survival. She embodies the potential for
salvation, and the central problem of life; impels the individual, involuntarily, towards further expansion of
consciousness, or induces involuntary contraction, leading to death.309 The Great Mother impels - pushes
(with certainty of mortality) and pulls (with possibility of redemption) - development of consciousness, and
of self-consciousness. The identity of death with the unknown has permanently and incurably destroyed
any possibility of final habituation to - adaptation to, more accurately - the world of experience. Man is in
consequence the (incurably) anxious animal:
"Thus the womb of the earth becomes the deadly devouring maw of the underworld, and beside the
fecundated womb and the protective cave of earth and mountain gapes the abyss of hell, the dark hole of
the depths, the devouring womb of the grave and death, and darkness without light, of nothingness. For
this woman who generates life and all living things on earth is the same who takes them back into
herself, who pursues her victims and captures them with snare and net. Disease, hunger, hardship, war
above all, are her helpers, and among all peoples the goddesses of war and the hunt express man's
experience of life as a female exacting blood. This Terrible Mother is the hungry earth, which devours
its own children and fattens on their corpses; it is the tiger and the vulture, the vulture and the coffin, the
flesh-eating sarcophagus voraciously licking up the blood seed of men and beasts and, once fecundated
and sated, casting it out again in new birth, hurling it to death, and over and over again to death."10
The terrible feminine has been represented by figures such as the chimera, the sphinx, the griffin, and
the gorgon, which combined and unified the most disparate, yet related, aspects of nature (those aspects
which, individually, intrinsically, inspire terror and deference). Gorgon-like figures and their "sisters"
appear commonly, throughout the world.311 As the Aztec Coatlicue, whose gruesome headdress was
composed of skulls, the Terrible Mother was goddess of death and dismemberment, object of sacrificial
homage. As Goddess of the Snake, she was sacred in ancient Crete, and worshipped by the Romans. Her
modern equivalents remain extant in Bali and India. Kali, Hindu Goddess - portrayed in Figure 34:
Unexplored Territory as Destructive Mother 312- is eight-armed, like a spider, and sits within a web of fire.
Each of her arms bears a tool of creation, or weapon of destruction. She wears a tiara of skulls, has pointed,
133 

phallic breasts, and aggressive, staring eyes. A snake, symbol of ancient, impersonal power, transformation
and rebirth, is coiled around her waist. She simultaneously devours, and gives birth, to a full-grown man.
Medusa, Greek monster, with her coif of snakes, manifests a visage so terrible that a single exposure turns
strong men to stone - paralyzes them, permanently, with fear.
Figure 34: Unexplored Territory as Destructive Mother
This gorgon is a late "vestigial" remnant, so to speak, of an early goddess, who simultaneously
embodied nature's incredible productive fecundity and callous disregard for life. A neuropsychological
description of the brain's response to the unexpected - such as we presented earlier - is one thing; the
134 



mythological representation is another. Consideration of the figure of the Great and Terrible Mother is
salutary; helps breed understanding of just what it is that our cultures - that is, our ritual identification with
the dead - protects us from. We are shielded from the terrors of our imagination (and from the things that
breed such terror) by the overlay of familiarity granted by shared frameworks of action and interpretation.
These "walls" serve their purpose so well that it is easy for us to forget our mortal vulnerability; indeed, we
generated those walls to aid that forgetting. But it is impossible to understand why we are so motivated to
maintain our cultures - our beliefs, and associated patterns of action - without gazing at and appreciating
the horrible figures generated by our ancestors.
The Great Mother, in her negative guise, is the force that induces the child to cry in the absence of her
parents. She is the branches that claw at the night traveler, in the depths of the forest. She is the terrible
force that motivates the commission of atrocity - planned rape and painful slaughter - during the waging of
war. She is aggression, without the inhibition of fear and guilt; sexuality in the absence of responsibility,
dominance without compassion, greed without empathy. She is the Freudian id, unconsciousness
contaminated with the unknown and mortal terror, and the flies in the corpse of a kitten. She is everything
that jumps in the night, that scratches and bites, that screeches and howls; she is paralyzing dismay, horror,
and the screams that accompany insanity. The Great Mother aborts children, and is the dead fetus; breeds
pestilence, and is the plague; she makes of the skull something gruesomely compelling, and is all skulls
herself. To unveil her is to risk madness, to gaze over the abyss, to lose the way, to remember the repressed
trauma. She is the molestor of children, the golem, the bogey-man, the monster in the swamp, the rotting
cadaverous zombie who threatens the living. She is progenitor of the devil, the "strange son of chaos." She
is the serpent, and Eve, the temptress; she is the femme fatale, the insect in the ointment, the hidden cancer,
the chronic sickness, the plague of locusts, the cause of drought, the poisoned water. She uses erotic
pleasure as bait to keep the world alive and breeding; she is a gothic monster, who feeds on the blood of the
living. She is the water that washes menacingly over the ridge of the crumbling dam; the shark in the
depths, the wide-eyed creature of the deep forests, the cry of the unknown animal, the claws of the grizzly
and the smile of the criminally insane. The Great and Terrible Mother stars in every horror movie, every
black comedy; she lies in wait for the purposefully ignorant like a crocodile waits in the bog. She is the
mystery of life that can never be mastered; she grows ever more menacing with every retreat.
I dreamed I saw my maternal grandmother sitting by the bank of a swimming pool, that was also a river.
In real life, she had been a victim of Alzheimer's disease, and had regressed, before her death, to a
semi-conscious state. In the dream, as well, she had lost her capacity for self-control. Her genital region
was exposed, dimly; it had the appearance of a thick mat of hair. She was stroking herself, absentmindedly.
She walked over to me, with a handful of pubic hair, compacted into something resembling a
large artist's paint-brush. She pushed this at my face. I raised my arm, several times, to deflect her
hand; finally, unwilling to hurt her, or interfere with her any farther, I let her have her way. She stroked
my face with the brush, gently, and said, like a child, "isn't is soft?" I looked at her ruined face and
said, "yes, Grandma, it's soft."
Out from behind her stepped an old white bear. It stood to her right, to my left. We were all beside
the pool. The bear was old, like little dogs get old. It could not see very well, and acted miserable and
unpredictably. It started to growl and wave its head at me - just like little mean dogs growl and look just
before they bite you. It grabbed my left hand in its jaws. We both fell into the pool, which was by this
time more like a river. I was pushing the bear away with my free hand. I yelled, "Dad, what should I
do?" I took an axe and hit the bear behind the head, hard, a number of times, killing it. It went limp in
the water. I tried to lift its body onto the bank. Some people came to help me. I yelled, "I have to do this
alone!" Finally I forced it out of the water. I walked away, down the bank. My father joined me, and put
his arm around my shoulder. I felt exhausted, but satisfied.
The unknown never disappears; it is a permanent constituent element of experience. The ability to represent
the terrible aspects of the unknown allow us to conceptualize what has not yet been encountered, and to
practice adopting the proper attitude towards what we do not understand.
For I am the first and the last.
I am the honored one and the scorned one.
135 


I am the whore and the holy one.
I am the wife and the virgin.313
The positive aspect of the matrix of all being - the "twin sister" of Kali, so to speak - stands in marked
contrast to the Terrible Mother. The beneficial unknown is the source of eternal plenitude and comfort. It is
"positive femininity," metaphorically speaking, that constitutes the ground for hope itself - for the faith and
belief in the essential goodness of things necessary to voluntary maintenance of life and culture. The
beneficial "sister" has in consequence acquired breadth and depth of metaphoric mythic representation
equivalent to that of the Terrible Mother. The beneficient aspect of the matrix of all things - the eternally
fecund "virgin" (because eternally renewed), the mother of the savior - serves as the embodiment of the
helpful source; serves as constant aid to painful travail, tragic suffering, and existential concern.
Redemptive knowledge itself springs from generative encounter with the unknown, from exploration of
aspects of novel things and novel situations; is part of the potential of things, implicit in them, intrinsic to
their nature. This redemptive knowledge is wisdom, knowledge of how to act, generated as a consequence
of proper relationship established with the positive aspect of the unknown, the source of all things:
Wisdom is radiant and unfading,
and she is easily discerned by those who love her,
and is found by those who seek her.
She hastens to make herself known to those who desire her.
He who rises early to seek her will have no difficulty,
for he will find her sitting at his gates.
To fix one's thought on her is perfect understanding,
and he who is vigilant on her account will
soon be free from care,
because she goes about seeking those worthy of her,
and she graciously appears to them in their paths,
and meets them in every thought.
The beginning of wisdom is the most sincere
desire for instruction,
and concern for instruction is love of her,
and love of her is the keeping of her laws,
and giving heed to her laws is assurance of immortality,
and immortality brings one near to God;
so the desire for wisdom leads to a kingdom. [Wisdom of Solomon (of the Apocrypha), RSV 6:12-20].
also:
Therefore I prayed, and understanding was given me;
I called upon God, and the spirit of wisdom came to me.
I preferred her to scepters and thrones,
and I accounted wealth as nothing in comparison with her.
Neither did I liken to her any priceless gem,
because all gold is but a little sand in her sight,
and silver will be accounted as clay before her.
I loved her more than health and beauty,
and I chose to have her rather than light,
because her radiance never ceases.
All good things came to me along with her,
and in her hands uncounted wealth.
I rejoiced in them all, because wisdom leads them;
but I did not know that she was their mother.
I learned without guile and I impart without grudging;
I do not hide her wealth,
136 






for it is an unfailing treasure for men;
those who get it obtain friendship with God,
commended for the gifts that come from instruction.
May God grant that I speak with judgment
and have thought worthy of what I have received,
for he is the guide even of wisdom
and the corrector of the wise. (Wisdom 7:7-15).
Wisdom may be personified as a spirit who eternally gives; who provides to her adherents unfailing
riches. She is to be valued higher than status or material possessions, as the source of all things. With the
categorical inexactitude characteristic of metaphoric thought - and its attendant richness of connotation -
the act of valuing this spirit is also Wisdom. So the matrix itself becomes conflated with - that is, grouped
into the same category as - the attitude that makes of that matrix something beneficial. This conflation
occurs because primal generative capacity characterizes both the "source of all things" and the
exploratory/hopeful attitudes and actions that make of that source determinate things. We would only
regard the latter - the "subjective stance" - as something clearly psychological (as something akin to
"wisdom" in the modern sense). The former is more likely to be considered "external," from our
perspective - something beyond subjective intervention. But it is the case that without the appropriate
attitude [Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: For
every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened."
(Matthew 7:7-8)] the unknown is a sterile wasteland.314 Expectation and faith determine the "response" of
the unknown (as courageous approach eliminates anticipatory anxiety, and exploration makes the
unexpected something valuable). So the indiscriminate categorization characterizing these passages has its
worth.
We are motivated to protect the products of our exploration, our familiar territories, because unexplored
phenomena are intrinsically meaningful, and that meaning is apt to show itself as threat. The probability
that the meaning of unexplored territory will be threat, however, appears to be a function of the interpretive
context within which it makes its appearance. If the unknown is approached voluntarily (which is to say,
"as if" it is beneficial), then its promising aspect is likely to appear more salient. If the unknown makes its
appearance, despite our desire - by contrast - then it is likely to appear more purely in its aspect of threat.
This means - if we are willing to admit to the existence of those things that we do not understand, those
things are more likely to adopt a positive face. Rejection of the unknown, conversely, increases the
likelihood that it will wear a terrifying visage, when it inevitably manifests itself. It seems to me that this is
one of the essential messages of the New Testament, with its express (although difficult-to-interpret)
insistence that God should be regarded as all-good.
The beneficial aspect of the unknown is something unavailable to the "unworthy," something eternal
and pure; something that enters into relationship with those who are willing, from age to age - and
something that makes "friends of God." She is also something that may be conceptualized using sexual
symbolism: something that may be "known," in the biblical sense. Joined with, as with a "bride," she
produces all things that are good:
I learned both what is secret and what is manifest,
for wisdom, the fashioner of all things, taught me.
For in her there is a spirit that is intelligent, holy,
unique, manifold, subtle,
mobile, clear, unpolluted,
distinct, invulnerable, loving the good, keen,
irresistible,
beneficient, humane,
steadfast, sure, free from anxiety,
all-powerful, overseeing all,
and penetrating through all spirits
that are intelligent and pure and most subtle.
For wisdom is more mobile than any motion;
137 

because of her pureness she pervades and penetrates all things.
For she is a breath of the power of God,
and a pure emanation of the glory of the Almighty;
therefore nothing defiled gains entrance into her.
For she is a reflection of eternal light,
a spotless mirror of the working of God,
and an image of his goodness.
Though she is but one, she can do all things,
and while remaining in herself, she renews all things;
in every generation she passes into holy souls
and makes them friends of God, and prophets;
for God loves nothing so much as the man who lives with wisdom.
For she is more beautiful than the sun,
and excels every constellation of the stars.
Compared with the light she is found to be superior,
for it is succeeded by the night,
but against wisdom evil does not prevail.
She reaches mightily from one end of the earth to the other,
and she orders all things well.
I loved her and sought her from my youth,
and I desired to take her for my bride,
and I became enamored of her beauty.
She glorifies her noble birth by living with God,
and the Lord of all loves her.
For she is an initiate in the knowledge of God,
and an associate in his works.
If riches are a desirable possession in life,
what is richer than wisdom who effects all things?
And if understanding is effective,
who more than she is fashioner of what exists? (Wisdom 7:22-8:6)315
The terrible unknown compels representation; likewise, the beneficial unknown. We are driven to
represent the fact that possibility resides in every uncertain event, that promise beckons from the depths of
every mystery. Transformation, attendant upon the emergence of change, means the death of everything old
and decayed - means the death of everything whose continued existence would merely mean additional
suffering on the part of those still striving to succeed. The terrible unknown, which paralyzes when it
appears, is also succour for the suffering, calm for the troubled, peace for the warrior, insight and discovery
for the perplexed and curious - is the redemptive jewel in the head of the toad or in the lair of the firebelching
dragon. The unknown is the fire, that burns and protects - the endlessly mysterious transcendent
object, that simultaneously gives and takes away. The positive aspect of the unknown, incarnated as the
many-breasted Greco-Roman Goddess Diana, or Artemis - mistress of the animals - is portrayed in Figure
35: Unexplored Territory as Creative Mother.
316
Everything that contains, shelters and produces exists as source for the symbolic representation of -
occupies the same category as - this promising element. Fruit distinctive for its seed-bearing properties,
such as the pomegranate or poppy, provides appropriate motif for gravid containment. The pig stands as
representative of fertility, and the cow - the holy beast of India - as embodiment of principle of
nourishment. Shellfish "stand for" generation and fertility because of their vulva-like shape. Inanimate
items such as boxes, sacks, and troughs contain and shelter, while similar objects, such as the bed, the
cradle, and the nest are characterized by protective and therefore "maternal" function.317 Humanized
representations - statuettes of nude goddesses, among the most ancient objects of art known318 - appear to
represent fecundity and the productive countenance of nature, in anthropomorphic form. The creation and
subsequent appreciation of such figures perhaps aided individuals and societies in their efforts to clarify the
nature of the human relationship to the protective aspect of existence. Makers of such statuettes placed
138 


great emphasis on collective, impersonal features of generation, such as breasts, genitals and hips (features
whose functions remain largely outside voluntary control), but devoted little attention to features defining
self-conscious individuality - like those of the face. Such figures apparently represented the vessel of life,
and were rendered in the image of woman, whose body generated human life, and nourishment for that life.
The body-vessel represented beneficial nature itself:
Figure 35: Unexplored Territory as Creative Mother
"All the basic vital functions occur in this vessel-body schema, whose "inside" is an unknown. Its
entrance and exit zones are of special significance. Food and drink are put into this unknown vessel,
while in all creative functions, from the elimination of waste and the emission of seed to the giving forth
139 



of breath and the word, something is "born" out of it. All body openings - eyes, ears, nose, mouth
(navel), rectum, genital zone - as well as the skin, have, as places of exchange between inside and
outside, a numinous accent for early man. They are therefore distinguished as "ornamental" and
protected zones, and in man's artistic self-representation they play a special role as idols."19

The unknown, source of all determinate information, is simultaneously destructive and creative. The
terrible aspect of the Great Mother threatens everything with dissolution. Her positive sister is the
generative aspect of being. Figure 36: The "Heavenly Genealogy" of the Destructive and Creative
Mothers portrays the relationship between the two "discriminable" sisters, their derivation from the unified
but ambivalent unknown, and their ultimate "descent" from the "dragon of chaos."

Figure 36: The "Heavenly Genealogy" of the Destructive and Creative Mothers
The ability to "restrict the appearance of the Terrible Mother," and "foster the realization of her
Benevolent Sister" (that is, the ability to decrease threat, and maximize promise and satisfaction) might
well be regarded as the "secret of successful adaptation." The existence of "representations of the twin
aspects of the unknown" allowed for practice in adaptation in the face of such representations - allowed
for exposure of the individual, in imagination and action, in controlled fashion, to potently constructed
representations of those things that he or she was destined to fear most, was necessarily most vulnerable to,
but which could not be forever avoided. Similar "rituals" underly every form of successful modern
140 

psychotherapy. Modern treatment for disorders of anxiety, to take a specific example - "desensitization" -
involves exposing an individual, "ritualistically," (that is, under circumstances rendered predictable by
authority) to novel or otherwise threatening stimuli (with appropriate reaction modelled by that authority.320
Such "desensitization" theoretically induces "habituation"; what is actually happening is that guided
exploration, in the course of behavior therapy, produces re-classification and behavioral adjustment (such
that the "once-terrifying thing" or "once-again-terrifying-thing" is turned (back) into something
controllable, familiar, and known). Voluntary exposure additionally teaches the previously-terrified
individual the non-trivial lesson that he or she is capable of facing the "place of fear" and prevailing. The
process of guided voluntary exposure appears to produce therapeutic benefits even when the "thing being
avoided" is traumatic321 - when it might appear cruel to insist upon exposure and "processing," from a
superficially "empathic" perspective.
The ritual of voluntary exposure fosters mimetic identification with the hero (whether this is explicitly
recognized, or not); teaches the individual that the courageous exploratory "spirit" can "eternally" prevail
over threat. It is this mimetic identification and its abstracted equivalents and consequences that account for
the increased general confidence and capabilities that tends to accompany exposure training. The
reclassification and behavioral adjustment, attendant upon therapeutic exposure, places the previously
terrible forces of the unknown back under the dominion of knowledge, into the domain of the known -
expands "explored territory" into chaos - places the "Great Mother" under the strictures of her "consort,"
culture, the Great Father. This is exploration-predicated "creation of the cosmos" from the precosmogonic
chaos, and the fostering of implicit identification with the Logos, the creative and redemptive Word.
Analysis of the much more dramatic, very widespread, but metaphorically equivalent phenomena of the
sacrifical ritual - a rite whose very existence compelled one insightful author to argue for the essential
insanity of man 322 - provides additional insight into the nature of the ability to transform threat into
promise. We have already discussed the fact that the valence of an object switches with context of
interpretation. It is knowledge of this idea that allows for comprehension of the meaning of the sacrificial
attitude. The beautiful countenance of the beneficial mother is the face the unknown adopts, when
approached from the proper perspective. Everything unknown is simultaneously horrifying and promising;
it is courage and genius (and the grace of God) that determines which aspect dominates. The uncontrollable
strength, sexuality and bloodlust of the bull is the power which, when domesticated, serves to foster,
protect, and engender the herd. The devastating power of sudden explosive combustion is reliable and
efficient transportation when appropriately harnessed. The gorgon of Nature is helpmistress when
approached by the brave, the honest and the humble.
Primary religious rituals, serving a key adaptive purpose, "predicated" upon knowledge of proper
"approach mechanisms," evolved to suit the space surrounding the primary deity, embodiment of the
unknown. The ubiquitous drama of human sacrifice, (proto)typical of primordial religious practice, enacted
the idea that the essence of man was something to be offered up voluntarily to the ravages of nature -
something to be juxtaposed into creative encounter with the terrible unknown. The offering, in ritual, was
often devoured, in reality or symbolically, as aid to embodiment of the immortal human spirit; as aid to
incorporation of the heroic process. Such rituals were abstracted and altered, as they developed - with the
nature of the sacrificial entity changing (with constancy of underlying "ideation").
As late as 1871, in India - for example - the festival honouring the Great Mother, in the guise of
Durga323 or Kali, was accompanied by the daily slaughter of twenty buffalo, two hundred and fifty goats,
and two hundred and fifty pigs. The blood-drenched sand in the sacrificial pits was replaced twice a day -
removed and buried in the earth to ensure fertility. The slaughter of animals is a relatively late development
from the psychohistorical viewpoint, and is generally preceded by, and stands in place of, the ritual
sacrifice of human victims. The indologist Heinrich Zimmer states:
In her "hideous aspect" (ghora-rupa) the goddess, as Kali, "the dark one," raises the skull full of
seething blood to her lips; her devotional image shows her dressed in blood red, standing in a boat
floating on a sea of blood: in the midst of the life flood, the sacrificial sap, which she requires that she
may, in her gracious manifestation (sundara-murti) as the world mother (jagad-amba), bestow existence
upon new living forms in a process of unceasing procreation, that as world nurse (jagad-dhatri) she may
suckle them at her breasts and give them the food that is "full of nourishment" (anna-purna). An ancient
141 









conception, extending back as far as the Stone Age: Nature must at every step be given a helping hand;
even she can accomplish nothing by herself. She is no more self-sufficient than man. Nothing takes
place of itself, either in the cosmos or in human beings. Man must perform clamorous rites in order to
liberate the moon from the clutches of the eclipse, to dispel its demons; and if the sun is to be released
from its winter feebleness and rise ever higher with the rising year, a young girl, symbolizing the sun,
must swing higher and higher into the sky. In order to bear fruit and nurture life, the earth mother
demands to be fertilized and strengthened by potations of blood, the vital fluid."24
The mysterious and seemingly irrational "sacrificial" ritual actually dramatizes or acts out two critically
important and related ideas: (1) that the essence of man - that is, the divine aspect - must constantly be
"offered up" to the unknown, must present itself voluntarily to the destructive/creative power that
constitutes the Great Mother, incarnation of the unpredictable (as we have seen); and (2) that the "thing
that is loved best" must be destroyed - that is, sacrificed - in order for the positive aspect of the unknown
to manifest itself.
The former idea is "predicated" on the notion that the unknown must be encountered, voluntarily, for
new information to be generated, for new behavioral patterns to be constructed; the latter idea is
"predicated" on the observation that an improper or outdated or otherwise invalid attachment - such as the
attachment to an inappropriate pattern of behavior, or behavior-derived belief - turns the world into waste,
by interfering with the process of adaptation itself. Rigid, inflexible attachment to "inappropriate things of
value" - indicative of dominance by a pathological hierarchy of values (a "dead god") - is tantamount to
denial of the hero. Someone miserable and useless in the midst of plenty - just for the sake of illustration -
is unhappy because of his or her attachments to the wrong "things." Unhappiness is frequently the
consequence of immature or rigid thinking - a consequence of the overvaluation of phenomena which are
in fact trivial. The neurotic clings to the things that make her unhappy, while devaluing the processes,
opportunities and ideas that would free her, if she adopted them. The sacrifice of the "thing loved best" to
"appease the gods" is the embodiment in procedure of the idea that the benevolent aspect of the unknown
will return if the present schema of adaptation (the "ruling king") is sufficiently altered (that is, destroyed
and regenerated). An individual stripped of his "identification" with what he previously valued is
simultaneously someone facing the unknown - and is, therefore, someone "unconsciously" imitating the
hero. The voluntary "stripping" of such identity makes the supplicant into a "new man" - at least if the
sacrifice was genuine. This is not to say that such ideas cannot degenerate into meaningless, empty and
cruel ritual.
The intimate relationship between "clinging to the past," "rejection of heroism," and "denial of the
unknown" is most frequently explicated in narrative form (perhaps because the association is so complex
that it has not yet been made explicit). The following fairy tale - a "wake-up call," from the psychoanalytic
"unconscious" - may serve as useful exemplar. It occurred spontaneously to me, in a single piece, while I
was trying to help a man I knew, who was undergoing a psychological crisis. His attachment to
unnecessary and superfluous material items was putting his future in serious danger, but he would not
admit this. I wanted to warn him that he would eventually pay a great price for his short-sightedness. He
ignored the story, however - with predictable results.
Cock-a-doodle-doo
Once upon a time there was a man who had a long hard journey ahead of him. He was trudging along
the way, over the boulders and through the brushes, when he saw a little shiny gnome with big white teeth
and a black toupee sitting by the side of the road. He was drumming on a log with two white bones, and
humming oddly to himself. The little gnome said,
"John - why work so hard? Why walk so fast? Who knows if you'll ever get there anyway? Come over
here. I have something to show you."
So John walked off the road. He was sick of walking, anyhow, because people kept throwing sticks and
stones at him. The little gnome said,
"I have a shiny red jewel I would like to sell you. Cheap. Here it is," and from beneath his cloak he
pulled the biggest ruby that the man had ever seen. It must have weighed a hundred pounds, and it shone
like the sun.
142 
The gnome said, "do you like it? It is an enchanted stone. What will you offer me for it?" and the man
said, "I don't have much - much money. But I will give you everything I have." The gnome looked
displeased, so John added: "I could pay some more monthly."
So the gnome accepted: "Fair enough! Buy now - pay later. Sounds good to me. I'm all for the
installment plan."
So the man gave the gnome all his money, and promised to pay the rest later. And the gnome walked
back into the bush by the road, clacking his teeth and giggling and twitching.
The more the man thought about his ruby, and the great deal he got, the happier he became. He started
back on the road, with a light heart, but soon discovered that he couldn't make much progress, because a
hundred pounds was a lot to carry. He said to himself:
"Why continue, anyway? I have what I want. Why don't I just stand here, holding my ruby - and when
people walk by, they can see how well I have already done!"
So he stopped. A little while later, one of his friends came along, and saw him standing there. His friend
said,
"John, why don't you come along with me? I have just opened a new business, and I could really use
some help! Come along quick! It will be opening soon!"
The man thought that sounded good, but his friend was in a hurry. Besides, couldn't he see the ruby?
How could he speed along beside him? Where would he put his jewel? So he said, "thanks, but I have to
take care of my jewel. Maybe I'll see you later."
His friend looked at him like he was crazy - but he was trying to get somewhere quick. So he just
shrugged a bit and said,"Okay, John. See you later,"and he sped on down the road.
A little while later, another friend came by, and he said, "John! Nice to see you! I am going back to
school! There are lots of wonderful things to learn! Lots of great things to do! The world is full of unsolved
problems! I could use some company! Would you like to come along?" and the man thought that sounded
pretty good - but his friend looked like he was in a hurry. Besides, it was tiring, standing beside the road,
holding the jewel, and he needed all the energy he had for that. So he said to his friend "thanks, but I have
to take care of my jewel. Isn't it beautiful? Maybe I'll see you later."
His friend looked at him like he was crazy - but he was trying to get somewhere quick. So he just
shrugged and said, "hope everything goes all right with you. See you later."
Many friends came and went, and the years went by. The jewel got heavier and heavier, but the man got
more and more attached to it. The only thing was, nobody seemed to notice how beautiful it was. People
would rush by, and talk about their plans
and
nobody had a ruby as big
and nobody seemed likely to get a ruby as big
so you'd think that someone might have said something
something, at least, like
"nice ruby, John. Sure wish I had one like that."
But it never happened.
Then one day someone new came down the road. He was bent over, and he was thin, and his hair was
grey, although he did not look that old. He was carrying a big dirty rock carefully in his arms, and he was
not making much progress.
The strange figure approached, and glanced up at John. Then he grinned, and said,
"why are you standing there stupidly, with a big ugly rock in your tired old hands? You look pretty daft.
I bet you wish you had a big ruby, like the one I am carrying!" and John thought "this poor man is
deluded. He is carrying a rock - it is me that has the ruby!" so he said, "excuse me sir, but you are sadly
mistaken. I am the one with the jewel. I met a little gnome by the side of the road, and he sold it to me. I am
still paying for it - although not so very much! You are carrying a rock!"
The tired stranger - who looked pretty damn annoyed - said, "I don't know what game you are playing,
mister. You have a rock. I have a jewel. The little gnome you described sold it to me - and he said it was
the only one! I have been carrying it for twenty years, and I will never let it go!"and John said, "but I have
been carrying mine for twenty years, too. It can't be just a rock!"
Rock or jewel? On and on they argued.
143 




Suddenly - out stepped the little gnome - as if he had never left! Only this time - he wasn't so little. He
was bigger, and redder, and menacing, and his laugh sounded like the rattling of chains.
"Quit arguing, you two! I've never seen a sight quite so pathetic. You're carrying rocks - both of you.
And if you ever would have had the sense to put them down for a second or two, you would have seen that!
"Oh well - at least you were diligent. And I played a mean trick. I feel bad.
"So - I'm going to give you what you really deserve. Do you want what you really deserve?" and John
and the thin stranger nodded eagerly. Finally, they thought.
"You haven't seen anything yet. Throw down your rocks!"
So John and the thin stranger obeyed. Each rock split down the middle, when it hit the ground. Out
flowed a river of ravenous white worms, which rushed towards the men, and devoured them whole, while
they thrashed about and screamed.
Soon, nothing was left - except a leg bone from each. The little gnome picked them up, and walked off
the road. He sat down by a hollow log, and started to drum.
He drummed, and he waited, and he hummed an odd little tune:
"A picture of food
feeds the whole hungry clan
the image of good
makes the whole healthy man
Why walk the mile?
Why do the work?
Just smile the smile!
success
after all
is a quirk!
Life isn't real
that's the message I give
It's easy that way
plus
who wants to live?"
It is ideas of the "necessity of sacrifice" that underlie, for example, the well-known but explicitly
incomprehensible ritual of Christian communion (more accurately, the ritual of the Christian communion
serves as the behavioral precursor for these explicit ideas). The Christian hero - Christ - is the spirit who
offers himself voluntarily to the cross, to the grave, to suffering and death, to the terrible mother. Such a
spirit is, above all, "humble" - which is a very paradoxical term, in this context. Arrogance is belief in
personal omniscience. Heroic humility, set against such arrogance, means recognition of constant personal
error, conjoined with belief in the ability to transcend that error (to face the unknown, and to update fallible
belief, in consequence). "Humble" therefore means, "greater than dogma" (as the spirit of man is a "higher
power" than the laws which govern his behavior). Christ's body (represented, in the communion ritual, by
the "ever-resurrecting" wheaten wafer), is the container of the incarnated spirit of the dying, reborn and
redemptive deity. This "body" is ritually devoured - that is, incorporated - to aid the ritual participants in
their identification with Christ, the eternally dying and resurrecting (sun) god. Construction of this awful
ritual meant furtherance of the abstract conceptualization of a permanent structural aspect of (every) human
psyche - the heroic aspect, the Word - as active, individually doomed, yet mythically eternal, destined to
tragic contact with threat and promise of unknown, yet constant participant in the creative adaptive
redemptive process.
The ritual act of exposure is held simultaneously to placate or minimize the cruel aspect of nature, and to
allow for establishment of contact with the beneficient. From the modern perspective, it might be said
(much more abstractly) that voluntary cautious, careful, exploratory encounter with the threatening and
unknown constitutes the precondition for transformation of that unknown into the promising (or at least the
mundane), as a consequence of shift in behavior or interpretation. We moderns interpret this "change in
experience" as alteration in subjective state. The pre-experimental mind, less capable of clearly
differentiating subject from object, more concerned with the motivational significance of the experience,
144 











observes instead that the fear-inducing character of the object has receded (as a consequence of the
courage of the explorer, or the benevolence of the thing in question).
Ritual sacrifice was an early (pre-abstract behavioral) variant of the "idea" of heroism, of belief in
individual power - the acting out of the idea that voluntary exposure to the unknown (or dissolution of the
most favored thing) constituted a necessary precondition (1) for the emergence of the beneficial "goddess"
and (2) for continued successful adaptation. Incorporation of the sacrificial individual, in actuality (in ritual
cannibalism) or in religious ceremony (in the mass, for example) meant assimilation of the culture-hero;
comprised a "preconscious" attempt to embody the heroic essence, to fortify the constituent elements of the
community against paralyzing fear of death and darkness - to fortify the individual and the social group
against fear of the unknown itself. The sacrificial ritual was acting out of the hero, before such "acting out"
could be represented in abstraction, in drama, in story. More abstract narrative representation of the target
of the "heroic sacrifice" then came to portray the emergence of the beneficient goddess, capable of
showering reward upon man, her eternal lover and child.
The spirit forever willing to risk personal (more abstractly, intrapsychic) destruction to gain redemptive
knowledge might be considered the archetypal representative of the adaptive process as such. The preexperimental
mind considered traumatic union of this "masculine" representative with the destructive and
procreative feminine unknown necessary precedent to continual renewal and rebirth of the individual and
community. This is an idea precisely as magnificent as that contained in the Osiris/Horus myth; an idea
which adds additional depth to the brilliant "moral hypotheses" contained in that myth. The exploratory
hero, divine son of the known and unknown, courageously faces the unknown, unites with it creatively -
abandoning all pretence of pre-existent "absolute knowledge" - garners new information, returns to the
community, and revitalizes his tradition. It is to this more complete story that we now turn our attention.
2.3.5. The Divine Son: Images of the Knower, the Exploratory Process
"Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of
old. Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon?" (Isaiah 51:9).
The great androgynous dragon of chaos is also the mythic figure who guards a great treasure, hidden in the
depths of a mountain, or who conceals a virgin princess in his lair. He is the fire-breathing winged serpent
of transformation - the undescribable "union of everything now discriminated," who constantly schemes to
take back what he produced. The Great and Terrible Mother, daughter of chaos, destroys those who
approach her accidentally, incautiously, or with the inappropriate attitude, but showers upon those who love
her (and who act appropriately) all good things. The Great and Terrible Father, son of chaos, gives rise to
sons of his own, but then attempts to crush, or even to devour them: he is precondition for existence, but
impediment to its successful elaboration. What might possibly constitute "the appropriate pattern of action"
in the face of such permanent and multifarious contradiction?
The fundamental act of creativity in the human realm, in the concrete case, is the construction of a
pattern of behavior which produces emotionally-desirable results in a situation that previously reeked of
unpredictability, danger and promise. Creative acts - despite their unique particulars - have an eternally
identifiable structure, because they always takes place under the same conditions: what is known is
"extracted," eternally, from the unknown. In consequence, it is perpetually possible to derive and re-derive
the central features of the meta-pattern of behavior which always and necessarily means human
advancement. Human beings are curious about the structure and function of everything, not least
themselves; our capacity to tell stories reflects our ability to describe ourselves. It has been said that Freud
merely recapitulated Shakespeare. But it was Freud's genius, despite his manifold errors, to bring what
Shakespeare portrayed dramatically up one level of abstraction, towards the philosophical (or even the
empirical). Freud moved information about behavior from the implicit narrative to the explicit theory (or, at
least, to the more explicit theory). Shakespeare performed a similar maneuver, like all story-tellers, at a
more "basic" level - he abstracted from what was still behavioral, from what had not even yet been
captured effectively in drama.
145 





During exploration, behavior and representational schema are modified in an experimental fashion, in
the hopes of bringing about by ingenious means whatever outcome is currently envisioned. Such
exploration also produces alteration of the sensory world - since that world changes with shift in motor
output and physical locale. Exploration produces transformation in assumption guiding behavior, and in
expectation of behavioral outcome: produces learning in knowing how and knowing what mode. Most
generally, new learning means the application of a new means to the same end, which means that the
pattern of presumptions underlying the internal model of the present and the desired future remain
essentially intact. This form of re-adaptation might be described as normal creativity, and constitutes the
bulk of human thought. However, on rare occasions, ongoing activity (specifically goal-directed or
exploratory) produces more profound and unsettling mismatch. This is more stressful (and more
promising), and necessitates more radical update of modelling - necessitates exploration-guided
reprogramming of fundamental behavioral assumption and associated episodic or semantic representation.
Such reprogramming also constitutes creativity - but of the revolutionary type, generally associated with
genius. Exploration is therefore creation and recreation of the world. The generation of new information
from contact with the unknown means the construction of experience itself; the destruction of previous
modes of adaptation and representation (previous "worlds") means return of "explored territory" to the
unexplored condition that preceded it, and then its restructuring, in more comprehensive form. This is
encounter with the Great and Terrible Mother, and death and resurrection of the Son and the Father.
A new manner of dealing with (that is, behaving with regards to or classifying) an emergent unknown is
the gift of the hero - a gift which demands to be given, which compels communication, either directly (say,
in the form of immediate imitation) or indirectly (in the form of abstract description, or narrative). There is
no real qualitative distinction between transformation of means, and transformation of ends (as we have
seen): what constitutes "ends" at a lower level of analysis becomes "means" at a higher level. It follows
that the "gift of the hero" constitutes normal and revolutionary adaptation, simultaneously - normal
adaptation, as schemas of action and representation are extended, such that the unknown is rendered
beneficial; revolution, as the old is restructured, to allow place for the new. This restructuring is equivalent
to the establishment of peace - the peace characterizing the mythic paradise, where the lion lays down with
the lamb. Such peace emerges as a consequence of the hierarchical organization of the "gods of tradition"
under the dominion of the hero. This means that the creative exploratory hero is also peace-maker, in his
complete manifestation:
I dreamed that I was standing in the grassy yard of a stone cathedral, on a bright sunny day. The yard
was unblemished, a large well-kept green expanse. As I stood there, I saw a slab of grass pull back
under the earth, like a sliding door. Underneath the "door" was a rectangular hole, that was clearly a
grave. I was standing on an ancient graveyard, whose existence had been forgotten. A medieval king,
dressed in solid armor, rose out of the grave, and stood at attention at the head of his burial site. Similar
slabs slid back, one after another, in numerous places. Out of each rose a king, each from a different
period of time.
The kings were all powerful, in their own right. Now, however, they occupied the same territory.
They became concerned that they would fight, and they asked me how this might be prevented. I told
them the meaning of the Christian wedding ceremony - a ritual designed to subjugate the two central
participants to the superordinate authority of Christ, the Christian hero, and said that this was the way
to peace.
If all the great kings would bow, voluntarily, to the figure of the hero, there would be no more reason
for war.
Every unmapped territory - that is, every place where what to do has not been specified - also
constitutes the battleground for ancestral kings. The learned patterns of action and interpretation that vie for
application when a new situation arises can be usefully regarded, metaphorically, as the current
embodiments of adaptive strategies formulated as a consequence of past exploratory behavior - as adaptive
strategies invented and constructed by the heroes of the past, "unconsciously" mimicked and duplicated by
those currently alive. Adaptation to new territory - that is, to the unexpected - therefore also means
successful mediation of archaic or habitual strategies competing, in the new situation, for dominance over
146 









behavioral output. Rank-ordering of these "warring" strategies - that is, construction of a context-specific
behavioral "dominance-hierarchy" (which corresponds to the nested narrative model proposed earlier)
therefore constitutes adaptation, just as much as creation of new situation-specific behaviors or modes of
interpretation (which are inevitably composed, anyway, of bits and pieces of the past). The process of
exploration - including its assimilative and accomodative aspects - is therefore inevitably entangled with
the process of peace-making. Exploration, in a given situation, can hardly be regarded as complete, until
the tendencies and theories that struggle for predominance in that situation have been organized to make
internal (or externalized) conflict and emotional upheaval cease.
The exploratory hero, mankind's savior, cuts the primordial chaos into pieces, and makes the world;
rescues his dead father from the underworld, and revivifies him; and organizes the "nobles" occupying his
kingdom into an effective, flexible and dynamic hierarchy. There is no categorical difference between the
individual who explores, and the individual who reconstructs "society," as a consequence of that
exploration. The assimilation of new information is an integral part of the exploratory process: an anomaly
has not been processed until the pre-existent interpretive schemas extant prior to its emergence have been
reconfigured to take its presence into account. Every explorer is therefore, by necessity, a revolutionary -
and every successful revolutionary is a peacemaker.
We act appropriately before we understand how we act - just as children learn to behave, before they
can describe the reasons for their behavior. It is only through the observation of our actions, accumulated
and distilled over the course of centuries, that we come to understand our own motivations - come to
understand the patterns of behavior that characterize our cultures (and these are changing as we model
them). Active adaptation precedes abstracted comprehension of the basis for such adaptation. This is
necessarily the case, because we are more complex than we can understand - and so is the world to which
we must adjust ourselves.
First we act, then we envision the pattern that constitutes our actions, then we use that pattern to guide
our actions. It is establishment of conscious (declarative) connection between behavior and consequences
of that behavior (which means establishment of a new feedback process) that enables man to abstractly
posit a desired future, to act in such a way as to bring that future about, and to judge the relevance of
emergent phenomena themselves, on the basis of their apparent relevance to that future. This ability
appears to be predicated on some developmental leap - at least insofar as the "guiding story" has become
conscious (or represented in episodic or semantic memory, as opposed to remaining implicitly embedded,
so to speak, in behavior) - and appears unlikely to characterize very young children (or animals, for that
matter). Jean Piaget solved the problem of the "goal-like" behavior in creatures not yet capable of abstract
conceptualization by presuming that "goals" are initially embedded in sensorimotor reflex operations,
which are instinctive. This essentially means that what is later story is first pattern - the pattern, for
example, of the socially-modified behavior that constitutes human being. It is only later, as "higher-order"
(episodic or semantic) cognitive systems become activated - that goals become explicitly imagined (and
that they can be considered, abstractly, before their enaction). So this means that it is possible to act in a
manner that looks "as-if" it were goal-directed, before goals as such have manifested themselves. Rychlak
describes Piaget's observation: "Children do not appear to be logicians at birth, conceptually interacting by
constructing schema from the outset. The initial constructions are being done biologically, and only at some
time later does the child schematize the reflexive patterns already underway...."25
First comes the action-pattern, guided by instinct, shaped without conscious realization by the
consequences of socially-mediated "rewards" and "punishments" (determined in their "structure and
locale" by the current social mores, products of historical forces). Then comes the capacity to imagine the
end towards which behavior "should" be directed. Information generated from the observation of behavior
provides the basis for constructing fantasies about such ends. Actions that satisfy emotions have a pattern;
abstraction allows us to represent and duplicate that pattern, as an end. The highest level abstractions
therefore allow us to represent the most universally applicable behavioral pattern: that characterizing the
hero, who (eternally) turns the unknown into something secure and beneficial; who eternally reconstructs
the secure and beneficial, when it has degenerated into tyranny.
The myth of the hero has come to represent the essential nature of human possibility, as manifested in
adaptive behavior, as a consequence of observation and re-representation of such behavior, conducted
cumulatively over the course of thousands of years. The hero myth provides the structure that governs, but
147 



does not determine, the general course of history; expresses one fundamental preconception, in a thousand
different ways. This idea (analogous in structure to the modern hypothesis, although not explicitly
formulated, nor rationally constructed in the same manner) renders individual creativity socially acceptable,
and provides the precondition for change. The most fundamental presumption of the myth of the hero is
that the nature of human experience can be (should be) improved by voluntary alteration in individual
human attitude and action. This statement - the historical hypothesis - is an expression of faith in human
possibility itself, and constitutes the truly revolutionary idea of historical man.

Figure 37: The Exploratory Hero as Son of the Heavenly Mother
All specific adaptive behaviors (which are acts that restrict the destructive or enhance the beneficial
potential of the unknown) follow a general pattern. This "pattern" - which at least produces the results
intended (and therefore desired) - inevitably attracts social interest. "Interesting" or "admirable" behaviors
engender imitation and description. Such imitation and description might first be of an interesting or
admirable behavior, but is later of the class of interesting and admirable behaviors. The class is then
imitated, as a general guide to specific actions; is re-described, re-distilled, and imitated once again. The
image of the hero, step by step, becomes ever clearer, and ever more broadly applicable. The pattern of
behavior characteristic of the hero - that is, voluntary advance in the face of the dangerous and promising
unknown, generation of something of value as a consequence and, simultaneously, dissolution and

reconstruction of current knowledge, of current morality - this behavioral pattern comes to form the kernel
for the good story, cross-culturally. That good story - which is what to do, when you no longer know what
to do - defines the central pattern of behavior embedded in all genuinely religious systems (furthermore,
provides the basis for the "respect due the individual" undergirding our conception of natural rights).
Representations of the uroboros, the dragon of chaos, and his daughter, the Great Mother, are symbolic
portrayals of the unknown. Mythological representation of the hero and his cultural construction are, by
contrast, examination and portrayal of who or what it is that knows, and of what it is that is known. The
creative/destructive feminine is the personality manifested in myth by everything unknown, threatening and
promising about and within existence. Myth tends to portray the generative individual consciousness
eternally willing to face this unknown power as masculine, in essence - in contradistinction to unconscious,
impersonal, and unpredictable femininity, and in light of its "seminal," active, "fructifying" nature.
The earliest "stages" of the development of the figure of the hero take the form of mythic
representations of the infant or adolescent, fully or partially dominated by potent maternal force.326 This
infant or adolescent is the specific individual, under the sway of the particular mother, and Homo sapiens,
the species, subject to nature. The "generative individual consciousness" as "eternal son of the virginal
mother" is represented in Figure 37: The Exploratory Hero as Son of the Heavenly Mother.
327 In his
more mature form, the hero - formerly "son of the heavenly mother" - can be portrayed as "lover of the
Great Mother" [the mother whose body he "enters" into, in creative (sexual) union - to die and reincarnate
(to fertilize and impregnate)]. The Great Mother is the holy prostitute, the whore of Babylon, as well as the
Virgin Mother, a maiden forever renewed, forever young, belonging to all men, but to no one man. Myth
commonly utilizes the (symbolically sexual) motif of heavenly incest - the image of devouring or engulfing
encounter, rife with creative potential - to represent union with the primordial feminine, to portray act of
creative (or destructive) encounter between the hero and the possibilities of life itself. This is "knowledge"
as sexual, creative act: the "voluntary generative union" of consciousness and chaos produces - or revives -
order and cosmos.

Figure 38: The Metamythology of the Way, Revisited

149 




The mythology of the hero, in toto, depicts the development and establishment of a personality capable
of facing the most extreme conditions of existence. The hero's quest or journey has been represented in
mythology and ritual in numerous ways, but the manifold representations appear in accordance with the
myth of the way, as previously described: a harmonious community or way of life, predictable and stable in
structure and function, is unexpectedly threatened by the emergence of (previously harnessed) unknown
and dangerous forces. An individual of humble and princely origins rises, by free choice, to counter this
threat. This individual is exposed to great personal trials, and risks or experiences physical and
psychological dissolution. Nonetheless, he overcomes the threat, is magically restored (frequently
improved) and receives a great reward, in consequence. He returns to his community with the reward, and
(re)establishes social order (sometimes after a crisis engendered by his return).
This most fundamental of stories is portrayed schematically in Figure 38: The Metamythology of the
Way, Revisited.
328 Chaos breeds novelty, promising and threatening; the hero leaves his community,
voluntarily, to face this chaos. His exploratory/creative "act" quells the threat embedded in chaos, and frees
what is promising from its "grip." Incorporation of this freed promise (this "redemptive" information) -
symbolized by union with the virgin, or discovery of the treasure - transforms the hero. His transformed
(enriched) behavior then serves his community as model. The group is therefore transformed - and
restabilized - in turn.
The ultimate or archetypal representation of the original "threatened" state is the unselfconscious (but
"incomplete") paradise that existed prior to the "fall" of man. More prosaically, that state is the innocence
and potential of childhood, the glory of the past, the strength of the well-ruled kingdom, the power of the
city, the stability, wealth and happiness of the family. The most primordial threat is the sudden
(re)appearance or discovery of one of the manifestations of the Terrible Mother: a flood, an earthquake, a
war, a monster (some type of dragon), a fish, a whale - anything unpredictable or unexpected, that
destroys, devours, traps, engulfs, dismembers, tortures, terrifies, weakens, mystifies, entrances, smothers or
poisons (this is a partial list). The hero, product of divine parentage and miraculous birth, survivor of a
dangerous childhood, faces the Terrible Mother in single combat, and is devoured. He is swallowed by a
great fish, or snake, or whale, and spends time underground, in the dark, in the winter, in the kingdom of
the dead, or in hell; faces a dragon, a gorgon, or witch, or a temptress - is inundated by water, by fire, by
storm, by dangerous animals - is tormented, buried alive, mesmerized, dismembered, disembowelled and
deluded. He defeats the monster, freeing those who had been previously defeated, and gains or regains a
lost or previously undiscovered object of value, a (virginal) woman or a treasure. Much older, much wiser,
he returns home, transformed in character, bearing what he has gained, and reunites himself triumphantly
with his community, which is much enriched - or even utterly transformed - by his fortune.329
The battle of the hero is a frequent motif in mythologically-inspired sculpture, drawing and painting. A
representative example is presented in Figure 39: Castle, Hero, Serpent and Virgin: St. George and the
Dragon.
330 All of the elements of the "meta-myth" are portrayed in this drawing: the threatened
community, represented by the walled city or castle; the winged dragon, who has emerged from the
underworld (and whose lair is surrounded by the bones of the dead); the hero, armed with the sword, who
"cuts" the leviathan into pieces, and makes the world; and the virgin, freed from the dragon's clutches, who
represents the benevolent, creative and fruitful aspect of the unknown. [The city is commonly portrayed on
a mountain, in such representations - the serpent in a valley, or across a river. The battle takes place at
sundown (when the sun-deity encounters the dragon of the night).331]
Solar myths portray the journey of the hero, utilizing simultaneously the motifs of the dragon-fight and
the "night sea-journey." In the typical solar myth, the hero is identified with the sun, bearer of the light of
consciousness, who is devoured nightly by the water-serpent of the West. In the night, he battles terribly
with this monster, and emerges victorious in the morning, rising renewed in the East:
"In this sequence of danger, battle, and victory, the light - whose significance for consciousness we
have repeatedly stressed - is the central symbol of the hero's reality. The hero is always a light-bringer
and emissary of the light. At the nethermost point of the night sea journey, when the sun hero journeys
through the underworld and must survive the fight with the dragon, the new sun is kindled at midnight
and the hero conquers the darkness. At this same lowest point of the year Christ is born as the shining
Redeemer, as the light of the year and light of the world, and is worshipped with the Christmas tree at
150 



the winter solstice. The new light and the victory are symbolized by the illumination of the head,
crowned and decked with an aureole."32
Figure 39: Castle, Hero, Serpent and Virgin: St. George and the Dragon
The Mesopotamian emperor and the Pharaohs of Egypt were solar gods, representatives of the
incarnated sun-deity, eternal victor of the unending battle between order and chaos, light and darkness,
known and unknown. In an allegorical sense, they might be considered the first true individuals - at least
from the perspective of the Western historical tradition. The Egyptian people devoted their entire cultural
endeavor to glorification of their rulers - motivated, unconsciously, by their participation in (their imitative
identification with) the essential god-stature of the Pharaoh. This idea was developed (abstracted and
generalized) further by the Greeks, who attributed to each male Greek a soul, and taken to its logical
conclusion by the Jews and the Christians, who granted every person absolute and inviolable individual
worth before [or (potential) identity with] God.
The Great Mother is embodiment of the unknown, of the novel. The hero - her son and lover, offspring
of the mystical marriage - is dramatic (first concrete behavioral, then imitative/imagistic, then verbal)
representation of the pattern of action capable of making creative use of that unknown. The potential for
expression of (and admiration for; representation of) that pattern constitutes a heritable characteristic of the
human psyche, expressed constantly in behavior, during the course of human cultural activity. Containment
of this pattern in dynamic image, in myth, follows centuries of observation, and generation of hypotheses,
regarding the core nature of Homo sapiens - the historical animal. The development of such containment
followed a complex path of increasingly abstracted description and re-description of self and other.


The hero is a pattern of action, designed to make sense of the unknown; he emerges, necessarily,
wherever human beings are successful. Adherence to this central pattern insures that respect for the process
of exploration (and the necessary reconfiguration of belief, attendant upon that process) always remains
superordinate to all other considerations - including that of the maintenance of stable belief. This is why
Christ, the defining hero of the Western ethical tradition, is able to say "I am the way, the truth, and the life:
no man cometh unto the Father, but by me" (John 14:6); why adherence to the Eastern way (Tao) - extant
on the border between chaos (yin) and order (yang) - ensures that the "cosmos" will continue to endure.
Figure 40: The Process of Exploration and Update, as the Meta-Goal of Existence schematically presents
the "highest goal" of life, conceptualized from such a perspective: identification with the process of
constructing and updating contingent and environment-specific goals is in this schema given necessary
precedence over identification with any particular, concretized goal. Spirit is thus elevated over dogma - so
to speak.

Figure 40: The Process of Exploration and Update, as the Meta-Goal of Existence
We use stories to regulate our emotions and govern our behavior; use stories to provide the present we
inhabit with a determinate point of reference - the desired future. The optimal "desired future" is not a
state, however, but a process - the (intrinsically compelling) process of mediating between order and chaos;
the process of the incarnation of Logos - the word - which is the world-creating principle.333 Identification
with this process, rather than with any of its determinate outcomes (that is, with any "idols" or fixed frames
of reference or ideologies) ensures that emotion will stay optimally regulated - and action remain possible
152 




- no matter how the "environment" shifts, and no matter when. In consequence of such identification,
respect for belief comes to take second place to respect for the process by which belief is generated.
The hero is narrative representation of the individual eternally willing to take creative action, endlessly
capable of originating new behavioral patterns, eternally specialized to render harmless or positively
beneficial something previously threatening or unknown. It is declarative representation of the pattern of
behavior characteristic of the hero that eventually comes to approximate the story of the savior. Behind
every particular (that is, historical) adventurer, explorer, creator, revolutionary and peacemaker lurks the
image of the "son of god," who sets his impeccable character against tyranny and the unknown. The
archetypic or ultimate example of the savior is the world redeemer, the Messiah - world-creating-andredeeming
hero, social revolutionary and great reconciliator. It is the sum total of the activity of the
"Messiah," accumulated over the course of time, that constitutes culture, the Great Father, order itself -
explored territory, the domain of the known. In the "meta-stable" society, however, the Father, though
healthy, is subordinate to the Son: all fixed values necessarily remain "subject" to the pattern of being
represented by the hero. In the "City of God" - that is, the archetypal human kingdom - the Messiah
eternally rules.
"I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and
came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him.

And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages,
should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom

that which shall not be destroyed." (Daniel 7:13-14).
2.3.6. The Great Father: Images of the Known, or Explored Territory
All particular adaptive behaviors (and interpretive schemas - schemas of value) are generated over the
course of time by the eternal pattern of behavior described in mythic language as characteristic of the
archetypal hero, the sun-god. These behaviors and schemas accumulate over the centuries (as a
consequence of imitation and other forms of memory-communication), but do not necessarily agree, so to
speak. Our hard-won adaptive methods struggle for predominance, often violently, within a given
individual, between individuals within societies, and between societies. The problem of organization
therefore arises. How do you arrange your possibilities, once you have originated them or copied them
from someone else? How is it possible to make sense of the historical accretion of knowledge and wisdom?
After all, multiple opportunities for behavioral output exist, in any given situation; furthermore, the
possibility of interpretation makes even the "situation" mutable. How can competing possibilities - the
multiplicity of potential choices - be amalgamated into some sort of unity; the kind of unity that makes
mutual coexistence (and mutually beneficial coexistence) possible? How, in brief, is it possible to construct
and maintain a society?
Procedural knowledge, generated in the course of heroic behavior, is not organized and integrated within
the group and the individual as a consequence of simple accumulation. Procedure "a," appropriate in
situation one, and procedure "b," appropriate in situation two, may clash in mutual violent opposition in
situation three. Under such conditions intrapsychic or interpersonal conflict necessarily emerges. When
such antagonism arises, moral revaluation becomes necessary. As a consequence of such revaluation,
behavioral options are brutally rank-ordered, or, less frequently, entire moral systems are devastated,
reorganized and replaced. This organization and re-organization occurs as the consequence of "war," in its
concrete, abstract, intrapsychic and interpersonal variants. In the most basic case, an individual is rendered
subject to an intolerable conflict, as a consequence of the perceived (affective) incompatibility of two or
more apprehended outcomes of a given behavioral procedure. In the purely intrapsychic sphere, such
conflict often emerges when attainment of what is desired presently necessarily interferes with attainment
of what is desired (or avoidance of what is feared) in the future. Permanent satisfactory resolution of such
conflict (between temptation and "moral purity," for example) requires the construction of an abstract
moral system, powerful enough to allow what an occurrence signifies for the future to govern reaction to
what it signifies now. Even that construction is, however, necessarily incomplete, when considered only as
153 








an "intrapsychic" phenomena. The individual, once capable of coherently integrating competing
motivational demands in the private sphere, nonetheless remains destined for conflict with the other, in the
course of the inevitable transformations of personal experience. This means that the person who has come
to terms with him or herself, at least in principle, is still subject to the affective dysregulation inevitably
produced by interpersonal interaction. It is also the case that such subjugation is actually indicative of
insufficient "intrapsychic" organization, as many basic "needs" can only be satisfied through the
cooperation of others.
The problems posed by the "future self" - whose still-potential existence has to be taken into account,
and used to govern action in the present - are very similar to those posed by the existence of others, whose
affective responses are equally hypothetical (as they cannot be experienced, directly, but only inferred).
The properly socialized individual has been trained to grant this "abstract other" (future self and other
person) ontological status equivalent to the experienced self, however - has been trained to use the
existence of that other as a guide to "proper action and interpretation" in the present. This means that for
the social being all individual actions come to evaluated with regards to their likely current and future
consequences, for the self and for the others likely affected. Such evaluation may take place directly - that
is, as a matter of "conscious deliberation"; alternatively, the well-socialized individual may act "as if" he or
she thought the matter through, by remaining in well-trodden moral pathways (which have been established
under the cumulative historical pressure produced by the necessity of maintaining intrapsychic and social
order). The more-implicit information extant in the latter case is "placed there" as a consequence of the
exchange of emotional information, attendant upon given action patterns, in the potential absence of
explicit rationale: someone is informed by subtle scornful gesture, for example, that a given (theoretically
pleasurable and even evidently harmless) behavior is "just not done" - which means is regarded by custom
as harmful, to the self and others, in some manner not easily observed but still "important." It is such
"arbitrary rules" that constitute the implicit information "coded" in societal structure - information not
necessarily placed there by rational means, not necessarily "comprehended," in any declarative sense;
information nonetheless transmissible and representable in mythology, etc., as a consequence of extendedterm
pattern-recognition and analysis.
The "stories" by which individuals live (which comprise their schemas of interpretation, which guide
their actions, which regulate their emotions) are therefore emergent structures shaped by the necessity of
organizing competing internal biological demands, over variable spans of time, in the presence of others,
faced with the same fate. This similarity of demand (constrained by physiological structure) and context
(constrained by social reality) produces similarity of response. It is this similarity of response, in turn, that
is at the base of the emergent "shared moral viewpoint" that accounts for cross-cultural similarity in myth.
This means, by the way, that such "shared viewpoints" refer to something real - at least insofar as
emergent properties are granted reality (and most of the things that we regard without question as real are
precisely such emergent properties).
The reactions of a hypothetical first-born child to his or her newborn sibling may serve as concrete
illustration of the interactions between the individual, the interpersonal, and the social. The elder sibling
may be drawn positively to the newborn by natural affiliative tendencies, and curiosity. At the same time,
however, the new arrival may be getting a substantial amount of parental attention, sometimes in preference
to the older child. This shift of parental care often produces frustration, manifested in aggressive behavior,
on the part of the supplanted sibling. The older child will therefore become conflicted, "internally," in
consequence of his affection for the new family member, curiosity about its nature, and irritation at the
creature's existence, demands, and influence on the (once) predictable interactions of the familial social
unit. The protective attitude of the parents, who restrict aggression on the part of the elder child, further
complicates things - draws the additional requirements of the social unit into the already difficult situation.
How is the child to resolve his conflicts? He must build himself a personality to deal with his new
sibling (must become a "proper big brother"). This means that he might subordinate his aggression to the
fear, guilt and shame produced by parental adjudication, on behalf of the baby. This will mean that he will
at least "act like a human being" around the baby, in the direct presence of his parents. He might also learn
to act as if the aggressive reaction motivated by his shift in status is less desirable, in total, than the
affiliative response. His as if stance may easily be bolstered by intelligent shift in interpretation: he may
reasonably gain from his younger sibling some of the attention he is no longer paid by parents - at least if
154 







he is diligent and genuine in his attempts to be friendly. He might also develop some more independent
interests, suitable to his new position as relatively mature family member. In the former, simplest case
(when he subordinates his aggression to fear), the child rank-orders his motivational states, as manifested in
behavior. In the latter, revolutionary situation, the child restructures the implicit presumptions that
originally gave rise to the conflict. Either way, the situation is resolved (re-storied) in the course of what
might reasonably be described as an internal war, accompanied, inevitably, by intense outbursts of pain,
fear and rage. The personality that emerges as a consequence of such a war is, at least in the revolutionary
case, something "more like the hero" than the personality that existed prior to the change in environmental
circumstances.
The situation of marriage provides an additional illustrative example, relevant to the adult situation. In
marriage, the desire for individual self-expression is necessarily limited by the desire for maintenance of
the intimate interpersonal relationship, and for adoption of the "respectable" social role that constitutes
such maintenance. The male, bachelor no more, may attempt to carry on his premarital mode of activity,
purely dependent on personal desire and whim, limited by whatever minimal necessary social obligations
he may have acquired previously. Soon he will discover, if he has taken an appropriately assertive partner,
that his (heretofore individualistic) wishes and desires produce conflict in his married life - manifested in
interpersonal strife and consequent emotional dysregulation.
The clashes that commonly accompany establishment of a permanent affiliative relationship arise as a
result of the incompatibility of (implicit and explicit) individual moral presumptions and propositions, in
the interpersonal sphere (arise as a result of an interpersonal "war of implicit gods"). Such clashes may be
resolved in a variety of manners. One partner may, through judicious application of physical or
psychological punishment, render the other impotent, so to speak, and subordinate - permanently
frustrated, miserable, anxious and hostile. The marriage may thus lose much of its value, or may dissolve
altogether. This does not constitute a "solution" - merely regression, in the face of emergent anomaly, to
the pre-existent "single personality." Alternatively, each partner may determine to take "the other" into
serious consideration, and re-arrange personal behavior (and emergent value) accordingly. This process
will not occur without capacity to engage in open conflict (to exchange information, realistically speaking)
or without the courage to voluntarily submit to the experience of negative emotion [including anxiety, guilt,
and shame, as previously "unconscious" (implicit) faults and insufficiencies come to light]. The mythic
subjugation of the partners in a marriage to the higher authority of Christ, the culture-hero, ritually
represented in the Christian marriage ceremony, constitutes "symbolic" aid to this process.334
Voluntary subordination of the personal wishes of both individuals to the higher moral order embodied
in the action patterns of the Christian savior means agreement, in principle (implicit or explicit) about the
nature of transcendent principles that can be referred to when mediation between incompatible desires and
presuppositions becomes necessary. This means that the "personality" constituted by the "mystical union"
of both partners in the marriage is supposed to approximate Christ - is supposed to stand as an entity
superordinate to the "less complete" individuals who compose the "married couple." This process of
voluntary subordination "to a higher deity" parallels the extended transpersonal historical process described
in the Enuma elish, with regards to the ascendance of Marduk. Through conflict (and cooperation), within
the "container" of the marriage, new moralities are created - new patterns of behavior (and assumption and
expectation) manifested and internally represented. This process may be guided to a healthy outcome
through mutual participation in community-sponsored religious ritual. Alternatively, individuals may
succeed, or fail, in isolation.
Motivational states compete for predominance in the present, in the purely subjective and interpersonal
spheres, and also compete across time. What is fear-provoking now may be tolerated because it means less
punishment (or less fear, or more pleasure, or more hope) in the future, insofar as intelligence or custom
can make that judgment; similarly, the social group and the additional pressure it produces is tolerated
because "the group" comprises the most effective currently imaginable solution to the problem of
adaptation - all things considered. This group - the current embodiment of human custom - is the
consequence of a battle between various "ways of being" fought across generations.
Although the "battle for predominance" that characterizes exchange of morally-relevant information can
easily be imagined as a war (and is often fought out, in reality, in the guise of genuine war), it is more
frequently the case that it manifests itself as a struggle between "beliefs." In the latter case, it loss of faith,
155 










rather than life, that determines the outcome of the battle. Human beings can substitute loss of faith for
death partly because they are capable of abstractly constructing their "territories" (making beliefs out of
them) and of abstractly abandoning those territories, once they are no longer tenable. Animals, less capable
of abstraction, are also able to lose face, rather than life, although they "act out" this loss, in behavioral
routines, rather than in verbal or imagistic battles (rather than through argument). It is the capacity to
"symbolically capitulate" and to "symbolically destroy" that in large part underlies the ability of individual
animals to organize themselves into social groups (which require a hierarchical organization) and to
maintain and update those groups, once established. Much the same can be said for human beings (who
also engage in abstract war, at the procedural level, as well as in real war and argumentation).
Strong "ideas" produce profound displays of faith - or, alternatively put: unshakeable displays of faith
are indicative of the "strength" of an idea. The strength of an integrative idea, or its pre-abstract procedural
equivalent, might be considered reasonably measured by its capacity to inhibit competing impulses -
especially those motivated by fear. Dominance displays in groups of primates and other complex higherorder
social animals provide a useful example of this. Most dominance disputes are settled before
escalation into physical aggression. It is the animal most capable of holding its ground in the face of
challenge - in spite of threat, regardless of fear - who is the likely victor in the case of such a dispute. The
capacity to maintain territorial position when challenged is therefore indicative of the degree to which
intrapsychic state is integrated with regards to current motivation [which means, indicative of how
"convinced" a given animal is that it can (should) hold its ground]. This integration constitutes power -
charisma, in the human realm - made most evident in behavioral display. The certainty with which a
position is held (whether it is a territorial position, dominance hierarchy niche, or abstract notion) - insofar
as this can be inferred from observable behavior, such as "absence of fear" - constitutes a valid indication
of the potential integrative potency of that position; constitutes an indication of how much the creature who
is holding the position believes in the rightness (justice, goodness) of his or her stance. The integrative
strength of beliefs of this type can be determined, accurately, through challenge (since the capacity to
withstand challenge is dependent upon that strength). This means that the ability of those who hold an idea
to withstand challenge without wavering constitutes one [non-empirical (?)] affective criteria for
determination of the truth of that idea - or at least of its intrapsychic utility. Hence the power of the martyr
- and the unwillingness of even modern totalitarians to allow their enemies to make public sacrifices of
themselves.
Rank-ordering of behavior in terms of comparative utility is (procedural, episodic or semantic) judgment
rendered upon value. Such judgment constitutes a decision about the "nature of good and evil," from the
mythic or narrative viewpoint. Such determinations of value are decisions whose function is organization of
future-oriented present individual behavior, manifested in the (inevitably) social context, in accordance
with the wisdom of past experience. The content of mythically-transmitted behavioral schemas and their
value-predicated arrangements generally remains implicit, outside the domain of descriptive
comprehensibility, because of their exceedingly complex structure, which evolved through the action of
primarily non-declarative evolutionary processes. The emotional upheaval caused by simultaneous
application of non-commensurate behavioral or interpretive strategies provides the impetus for the
organization of those strategies. Such organization emerges as a result of the "struggle for dominion,"
intrapsychically or interpersonally - emerges in consequence of a quasi-Darwinian struggle for survival.
Over the course of centuries, the actions of ancestral heroes, imitated directly and then represented in
myth, become transformed, simplified, streamlined and quickened - reduced as it were ever more precisely
to their "Platonic" forms. Culture is therefore the "sum total" of surviving historically-determined
hierarchically-arranged behaviors and their second and third-order abstract representations, and more: it is
the integration of these, in the course of endless social and intrapsychic conflict, into a single pattern of
behavior - into a single system of morality, simultaneously governing personal conduct, interpersonal
interaction and imagistic/semantic description of such. This pattern is the "corporeal ideal" of the culture,
its mode of transforming the unbearable present into the desired future, its guiding force, its central
personality. This personality, expressed in behavior, is first embodied in the king or emperor, socially
(where it forms the basis for "sovereignty"). Abstractly represented - imitated, played, ritualized, and
storied - it becomes something ever-more psychological. This embodied and represented "cultural
character" is transmitted through the generations, transmuting in form, but not in essence - transmitted by
156 




direct instruction, through imitation, and as a consequence of the human ability to incorporate personality
features temporarily disembodied in narrative.
The "integrative conflict" of complex ideas, giving rise to the "central character of culture," appears as a
process extending over untold centuries. This process represents itself, in mythology, as the "battle of the
gods in heaven," which Eliade has described as the "conflict between divine generations."35 Eliade
discusses Hittite/Hurrian and Canaanite mythology (circa 1740-1200 B.C.), and its relationship to similar
myths, in ancient Phoenicia and elsewhere. In the Hittite theogony, the relative sovereignty of the gods was
determined by war conducted between them:
"The initial episode, "Kingship in Heaven," explains the succession of the first gods. In the beginning,
Alalu was king, and Anu, the most important of the gods, bowed before him and served him. But after
nine years Anu attacked and vanquished him. Then Alalu took refuge in the subterranean world, and
Kumarbi became the new sovereign's servant. Nine years passed, and Kumarbi in his turn attacked Anu.
The latter fled, flying into the sky, but Kumarbi pursued him, caught him by the feet, and threw him to
the ground, after biting his 'loins.' Since he was laughing and rejoicing over his exploit, Anu told him
that he had been impregnated. Kumarbi spat out what was still in his mouth, but a part of Anu's virility
entered his body, and he became big with three gods. The rest of the text is badly mutilated, but it is
presumed that Anu's "children," with Teshub, the storm god leading them, make war on Kumarbi and
dethrone him."36
Eliade continues, drawing upon Philo of Byblos' archaic Phoenician History:
"...the first sovereign [Phoenician] god was Elioun (in Greek, Hypistos, "The Most High"),
corresponding in the Hurrian/Hittite mythology to Alalu. From his union with Bruth there came into the
world Uranus (corresponding to Anu) and Ge (Gaea). In their turn, these two engendered four sons, the
first of whom, El (or Kronos), corresponds to Kumarbi. As the result of a quarrel with his wife, Uranus
tries to destroy his progeny, but El forges a saw (or lance?) for himself, drives out his father, and
becomes the sovereign. Finally, Baal (representing the fourth generation and corresponding to Teshub
and Zeus) obtains the sovereignty; exceptionally, he obtains it without combat....
It is important to emphasize at once the "specialized" and at the same time syncretistic character of
this myth, and not only in its Hurrian/Hittite version (in which, besides, there are a number of SumeroAkkadian
elements). The Enuma elish 337 likewise presents (1) a series of divine generations, (2) the
battle of the young gods against the old gods, and (3) the victory of Marduk, who thus assumes the
sovereignty....
To sum up: all the myths that recount the conflicts between successive generations of gods for the
conquest of universal sovereignty justify, on the one hand, the exalted position of the last conquering
god and, on the other hand, explain the present structure of the world and the actual condition of
humanity."38
The "gods" are transpersonal forces - "instinctive" and socially-modified - comprising universal elements
of human experience. The organization of these gods, as a consequence of combat, is an abstracted and
poetic description of the manner in which emergent behavioral patterns and interpretive schemas - moral
positions, so to speak - fight for predominance, and therefore organize themselves, over the course of time.
The manner in which a given society has come to organize its behavioral hierarchies is implicit in its
mode of attributing to, or perceiving value in, "objects" (which is to say, implicit in its mode of restricting
the meaning manifested by objects to an acceptable range and magnitude). The brutally organized
consequence of "the battle of the gods" constitutes the tradition that structures the intrapsychic hierarchy of
values, regulates interpersonal interaction, and keeps individual emotion in check (as the consequences of
individual and social behavior, when guided by tradition, remain predictable). A given behavior,
manifested in the absence of another being, does not necessarily produce the same outcome when it plays
itself out in the presence of others. Two children and one toy is not the same situation as one child and one
toy (because, in a sense, the toy is not the same, not from the phenomenological perspective). The
behavioral tendencies of individuals undergo constant modification, in the social situation, because the fact
157 








of the society in the situation changes the motivational relevance of all the objects in the situation. Two
children with one toy have to come to an agreement, which is mutual modification of behavior, before the
toy can be what it "is" when encountered alone - which is fun, rather than trouble.
The behavioral tendencies of individuals are mimicked action patterns which were originally established
as a consequence of heroic behavior, at some point in the past. The mutual interplay of action patterns in
the social world, however, results in their inevitable modification. Patterns of behavior - those motivated
by aggression, for example, or love, or fear - have a transpersonal basis, which accounts, in part, for their
personification as gods (or, for their existence as gods, from a more liberal interpretive perspective). It is
the constant clash of these gods that allows for their mutual co-existence, and their social organization. A
number of "gods" might operate simultaneously in the domain of a disputed toy, for example (in the
"unknown territory" brought about by the fact of something desirable, but singular, in a social
environment). The "god of war" (Ares, say, for the sake of argument) might emerge "within" one child, or
both - in which case a fight will ensue. The winner - assuming there is one - may then be more likely to be
warlike, in the future, in a social situation characterized by ambiguity. The loser might have other thoughts
[may come, for example, to be dominated by Pan(ic) when faced with emergent toy-conflict with a stranger
(may come to cry and withdraw)]. Alternatively, in the optimistic case, one or both children may negotiate
a fair settlement, so both are satisfied, and neither hurt. The "negotiation" of a "fair settlement"
presupposes that each child treats the other as an "object of value" - that is, as one who must be taken into
account in the course of behavioral decisions. This taking into account of others is recognition of their
implicit worth - their "basic human rights" - as (mythologically-equivalent) community members. Such
"recognition" is acted out, before it is understood - and provides the basis for the organization of societies,
on a basis other than that of strength. Despite the "lack of explicit understanding," however, the fact of
negotiation is indicative of "identity with the hero" (the eternal "means to peace") as the hero is "divine
peacemaker," in one of his many guises. The emergence of negotiation, during time of dispute, is therefore
both "spontaneous incarnation of the savior," and source of information for the derivation of stories about
"the nature of the hero" (which are useful for future reference).
In the case of children, engaged in a dispute over toys: a parent who (for the sake of argument) allows
the stronger child preferential access to the desired object is making the moral claim that the thing - and the
aggressive desire for the thing, which may well be "conflated" with the thing - is something of higher value
than the emotional state or physical well-being of the defeatable other. The parent may also - alternatively
- require the children engaged in conflict to mediate between their competing demands, without reverting
to "might makes right," and to construct for themselves a "hierarchy of value" governing behavior in the
"chaotic situation" defined by the mutually-desirable, but singular toy. It is the "sum total" of such
interactions, conducted in once-unexplored territory, hierarchically organized, that come to compose
culture.
In the case of broader society: the "meaning" of an object - that is, the significance of that object for
emotional regulation and behavioral output - is determined by the social consequences of behaviors
undertaken and inferences drawn in its presence. Thus internal motivational forces vie for predominance
under the influence of social control. The valence of erotic advances made by a given woman, for example
- which is to say, whether her behavior invokes the "goddess of love" or the "god of fear" - will depend on
her current position in a given social hierarchy. If she is single, and acting in context, she may be
considered desirable; if she is the presently-somewhat-too-intoxicated wife of a large and dangerous man,
by contrast, she may be placed in the category of "something best run away from quickly."
When exploration culminates in punishment - for example - the exploratory tendency, matched to that
situation, will come under the inhibitory control of fear. When this subordination occurs as a consequence
of the investigation of a natural object, the interpretation would be that something has been learned about
the nature of the world (about that part of it which is dangerous, at any rate). The process is extended
complexly in the social sphere. A motivated pattern of action (even the motivated state itself) may come
under the inhibitory control of fear, because its behavioral expression within the social community results
in social rejection (or other interpersonally-mediated punishment). Thus it could be said that the structure
of the internal motivational state reflects the consequences of behavior undertaken in the nature and social
worlds - or, more particularly, that there is an isomorphic relationship between the state of the internal
representation of motivational states and the external, social world. It is for this reason that a political state
158 



and a psychological state can be in some sense regarded as identical (and why individuals come so easily to
"identify" with their social groupings).
The culturally determined meaning of an object - apprehended, originally, as an aspect of the object - is
in fact in large part implicit information about the nature of the current dominance hierarchy, which has
been partially transformed into an abstract hypothesis about the relative value of things (including the self
and others). This is to say - who owns what, for example, determines what things signify - and who owns
what is dominance-hierarchy dependent. What an object signifies is determined by the value placed upon it,
manifested in terms of the (socially-determined) system of promises, rewards, threats and punishments
associated with exposure to, contact with, and use or misuse of that object. This is in turn determined by the
affective significance of the object (its relevance, or lack thereof, to the attainment of a particular goal), in
combination with its scarcity or prevalence, and the power (or lack thereof) of those who judge its nature.
In keeping with this observation, the existentialist psychotherapist Ludwig Binswanger observes that:
"All "metamorphoses of the egoistic in social instincts" and thus, properly said, all metamorphoses of
evil into good drives and dispositions, occur, according to Freud, under compulsion. 'Originally, i.e., in
human history [such transformations occurred] only under external compulsion, but they [occurred]
through the bringing into the world of hereditary dispositions for such transformations and also through
their perpetuation and reinforcement 'during the life of the individual himself.'' Indeed, this whole
"development" takes the direction in which external compulsion is introjected, and which, in the case of
the human Super-ego, is completely absorbed. This transformation occurs, as we know, 'by the
admixture of erotic components': 'we learn to value being loved as an advantage by virtue of which we
may do without other advantages.' Culture is thus 'attained through the renunciation of instinctual
gratifications and furthered by every new development which serves the purposes of renunciation.'
In all this, we stand before the pure specimen of homo natura: bodily instinct, the gaining of pleasure
(sacrificing a lesser for a greater gain), inhibition because of compulsion or pressures from society (the
prototype being the family), a developmental history in the sense of ontogenetic and phylogenetic
transformations of outer into inner compulsions, and the inheritance of these transformations."39
Whether a particular behavioral strategy (planned or exploratory) produces a positive or negative
outcome in a particular situation depends, for social animals, on the nature of the social environment in
which it is manifested. Any given "object" capable of eliciting behavior is necessarily part of a social
context, among social animals; that social context plays an important role in determining the value of the
object. It is social-determination of value that helps make an object neutral, dangerous, promising, or
satisfying - in large part, independently of the "objective" properties of the item in question. The sociallydetermined
affective significance of the object is "naturally" experienced as an aspect of the object - which
is to say that the charisma radiating from an Elvis Presley guitar is "part" of the guitar. This means that the
meaning of objects in a social context is actually information about the structure of that social context [as
well as "part" of the object (its "magic") from the mythological or narrative perspective].
Identification of the context-dependent meaning of objects in the social environment, which is
determination of the behavioral patterns whose manifestation is appropriate in that situation, means
encounter with cultural structure designed to bring predictability to the ongoing flow of events.
Participation in the processes and representations comprising that structure (that is, adoption of social
identity) means heightened capacity to predict behavior of self and other - and, therefore, capacity to
regulate emotion through the ebb and flow of life. Much potential unpredictability remains "constrained"
by the shared identity constituting culture. This social identity, which is a story about how things are and
how they should be - "things" including the self and the other - provides the framework that constrains the
otherwise unbearable a priori motivational significance of the ultimately unknowable experiential object.
The unknown surrounds the individual, like the ocean surrounds an island, and produces affect, compels
behavior, whenever it shows its terrible but promising face. Culture is constructed in spite of (in
cooperation with, in deference to) this omnipresent force, and serves as a barrier, quelling emotion,
providing protection against exposure to the unbearable face of God.
It is the conservative aspect of society that ensures that the past, as presently re-incarnated and
remembered, continues to serve as ultimate source of moral virtue and emotional protection. This
159 




remembered past is the mythical Father, echoed more abstractly in one "person" of the Christian Trinity.
The power of the past is given due recognition in the ritual of ancestor worship, for example, which is
motivated by desire to remain "in communication" with the dead (which is motivated, that is, by desire to
retain the wisdom, protective power and guiding hand of the dead). Such motivation comprised a force
sufficient to give impetus to the construction of megaliths - massive stone "testaments to the past" - in a
geographical zone stretching from western and northern Europe, through the Middle East, into Tibet and
Korea, from 4000 B.C. to the present day.340 The megaliths, like the modern necropolis or cemetery, are
"cities of the dead," monuments and aid to memory and the continuity of culture. Eliade states:
"Megaliths have a relation to certain ideas concerning existence after death. The majority of them are
built in the course of ceremonies intended to defend the soul during its journey into the beyond; but they
also insure an internal postexistence, both to those who raise them during their own lifetime and to those
for whom they are built after death. In addition, megaliths constitute the unrivaled connection between
the living and the dead; they are believed to perpetuate the magical virtues of those who constructed
them or for whom they were constructed, thus insuring the fertility of men, cattle, and harvests."41
also
"By virtue of the megalithic constructions, the dead enjoy an exceptional power; however, since
communication with the ancestors is ritually assured, this power can be shared by the living.... What
characterizes the megalithic religions is the fact that the ideas of perenniality and of continuity between
life and death are apprehended through the exaltation of the ancestors as identified, or associated, with
the stones."42
What is cast in stone, so to speak, is remembered - and what is remembered (in the absence of
permanent literate means of communication) is the value of culture, the significance of the discoveries of
all those whose exisence preceded the present time. The past, made metaphorically present in the form of
stone, is the mythical ancestor-hero - is Osiris, the founder of the community. In traditional communities,
awe-inspired imitation of the actions of that primary personage, modified by time and abstracted
representation, retains primary force (retains potent force, even in revolutionary cultures such as our own).
The action of the pre-experimental man consists of ritual duplication, and simultaneous observation of
taboo - action bounded by custom. When such a man endeavors to produce a particular end, he follows an
exemplary pattern. This pattern was "established" by his ancestral progenitors in a time, "subsuming all
time," and in a "divine" (actually, communitarian-intrapsychic) space. His tradition, after all, is not merely
the force of the past - it is that force, as it is exists and is represented in the present. What is remembered
takes on representation as a pattern - as that pattern of behavior characteristic of the culture-creating
"supernatural beings" who lived prior to living recollection. This pattern is traditional behavior, as
established and organized by those who were capable of originating adaptation - or, it could be said, as
established and organized by the immortal and central human spirit who constantly battles the fear of death
and creates the conditions that promote life:
"... for the man of traditional societies everything significant - that is, everything creative and powerful
- that has ever happened took place in the beginning, in the Time of myths.
In one sense it could almost be said that for the man of archaic societies history is "closed"; that it
exhausted itself in the few stupendous events of the beginning. By revealing the different modes of
deep-sea fishing to the Polynesians at the beginning of Time, the mythical Hero exhausted all the
possible forms of that activity at a single stroke; since then, whenever they go fishing, the Polynesians
repeat the exemplary gesture of the mythical Hero, that is, they imitate a transhuman model.
But, properly considered, this history preserved in the myths is closed only in appearance. If the man
of primitive societies had contented himself with forever imitating the few exemplary gestures revealed
by the myths, there would be no explaining the countless innovations he has accepted during the course
of Time. No such thing as an absolutely closed primitive society exists. We know of none that has not
borrowed some cultural elements from outside; none that, as the result of these borrowings, has not
changed at least some aspects of its institutions; none that, in short, has had no history. But, in contrast
160 


to modern society, primitive societies have accepted all innovations as so many "revelations," hence as
having a superhuman origin. The objects or weapons that were borrowed, the behavior patterns and
institutions that were imitated, the myths or beliefs that were assimilated, were believed to be charged
with magico-religious power; indeed, it was for this reason that they had been noticed and the effort
made to acquire them. Nor is this all. These elements were adopted because it was believed that the
Ancestors had received the first cultural revelations from Supernatural Beings. And since traditional
societies have no historical memory in the strict sense, it took only a few generations, sometimes even
less, for a recent innovation to be invested with all the prestige of the primordial revelations.
In the last analysis we could say that, though they are "open" to history, traditional societies tend to
project every new acquisition into the primordial Time, to telescope all events in the same atemporal
horizon of the mythical beginning."43
The social structure that emerges, over time, as a consequence of the "battle of the gods," might be most
accurately likened to a personality (to the personality adopted by all who share the same culture). It is in
fact the personality of "the dead heroes of the past" (the "hero as previously realized,") and is most
frequently symbolized by the figure of the Great Father, simultaneous "personification" of order and
tyranny. "Culture" binds "nature." The archetypal Great Father protects his children from chaos; holds back
the precosmogonic water from which everything was derived, to which everything will "return," and serves
as progenitor of the hero. The protective capacity of benevolent tradition, embodied in the form of political
order, constitutes a common mythological/narrative theme. This may be illustrated for our purposes
through consideration and analysis of a Polish folktale: The Jolly Tailor who became King.
344 Nitechka, the
hero of the story, is a simple tailor. He courageously aids a wounded gypsy - that is, acts humanely towards
an outsider, a stranger, a personified "emissary of chaos." In return, the gypsy provides him with
"redemptive" information - informs him that if he walks westward, he will become king. He acquires a
scarecrow - "the Count" - as a companion, and has a number of adventures with him. Finally, the two
travelers arrive at the town of Pacanow, and observe the proceedings there - in great astonishment:
"All around the town it was sunshiny and pleasant; but over Pacanow the rain poured from the sky as
from a bucket.
'I won't go in there,' said the Scarecrow, 'because my hat will get wet.'
'And even I do not wish to become King of such a wet kingdom,' said the Tailor.
Just then the townspeople spied them and rushed toward them, led by the Burgomaster riding on a
shod goat.
'Dear Sirs,' they said, 'perhaps you can help us.'
'And what has happened to you?' asked Nitechka.
'Deluge and destruction threaten us. Our King died a week ago, and since that time a terrible rain has
come down upon our gorgeous town. We can't even make fires in our houses, because so much water
runs through the chimneys. We will perish, honorable Sirs!'
'It is too bad,' said Nitechka very wisely.
'Oh, very bad! And we are most sorry for the late King's daughter, as the poor thing can't stop crying
and this causes even more water.'
'That makes it still worse,' replied Nitechka, still more wisely.
'Help us, help us!' continued the Burgomaster. 'Do you know the immeasurable reward the Princess
promised to the one who stops the rain? She promised to marry him and then he will become King.'"
The basic plot is established. The tailor - he who clothes, mends and ties - is the hero. Although simple
(poor in outward appearance, humble, willing to take risks, helpful and kind), he has the capacity to
become King. He journeys to a town threatened by a deluge (by chaos, in the guise of "return of the
primordial waters"). This deluge began after the recent death of the King. The king's daughter - benevolent
(young, beautiful, good) counterpart to the forces of the negative feminine (the unstoppable rain) - appears
willing to unite with whoever "saves the Kingdom." She represents the potential embedded in voluntarily
confronted chaos (yet is assimilated to her primordial partner, the Great Mother, by her "rain-like" tears).
Nitechka realizes that he must bring back "pleasant weather." He ponders the situation for three long
days. Finally, he is granted a revelation:
161 



"'I know where the rain comes from!'
'Where from?'
'From the sky.' [that is, from 'heaven']
'Eh!' grumbled the Scarecrow. 'I know that too. Surely it doesn't fall from the bottom to the top, but
the other way around.'
'Yes,' said Nitechka,' but why does it fall over the town only, and not elsewhere?'
'Because elsewhere is nice weather.'
'You're stupid, Mr. Count,' said the Tailor. 'But tell me, how long has it rained?'
'They say since the King died.'
'So you see! Now I know everything! The King was so great and mighty that when he died and went
to Heaven he made a huge hole in the sky.'
'Oh, oh, true!'"
The death of the King - who is the "ritual model for emulation" [the figure who brings order or
predictability to interpersonal interaction undertaken among his subjects] - means potential dissolution of
security and protection. The King's death (his "return to heaven," or to the kingdom of the dead) is
equivalent to the fracturing of a protective wall. The unknown, from which his subjects were protected,
pours through the breached wall. The kingdom risks inundation:
"'Through the hole the rain poured and it will pour until the end of the world [emphasis added] if the
hole isn't sewed up!'
Count Scarecrow looked at him in amazement.
'In all my life I have never seen such a wise Tailor,' he said."
Nitechka orders the townspeople to bring "all the ladders in the town," to "tie them together," and to
"lean them against the sky." He ascends the ladder, with a hundred needles, threading one:
"Count Scarecrow stayed at the bottom and unwound the spool on which there was a hundred miles of
thread.
When Nitechka got to the very top he saw that there was a huge hole in the sky, as hole as big as the
town. A torn piece of the sky hung down, and through this hole the water poured."
This narrative fragment is particularly interesting, as it is apparent that the water is coming, somehow,
from "behind" the sky. The sky is utilized in mythology, in general, as a "masculine" symbol (at least the
day sky) and tends to be assimilated to the same natural category as "the king." It appears to be damage to
the general structure of the "masculine" sky, produced by the death of a specific king, that constitutes the
breach through which precosmogonic material (in the form of water) is able to pour through. The "death of
the king" and the "breach in the sky" is equivalent in meaning to the death of Apsu, in the Enuma elish -
the death that heralded the re-appearance of Tiamat. In this tale, however, Nitechka "repairs the structure of
the sky" (an act equivalent to the reconstitution of Osiris), instead of directly battling the "dragon of
chaos":
"So he went to work and sewed and sewed for two days. His fingers grew stiff and he became very tired
but he did not stop. When he had finished sewing he pressed out the sky with the iron and then,
exhausted, went down the ladders.
Once more the sun shone over Pacanow. Count Scarecrow almost went mad with joy, as did all the
other inhabitants of the town. The Princess wiped her eyes that were almost cried out, and throwing
herself on Nitechka's neck, kissed him affectionately."
The "creative union" of the hero with the "benevolent aspect of the unknown" is evidently approaching.
"Nitechka was very happy. He looked around, and there were the Burgomaster and Councilmen
bringing him a golden scepter and a gorgeous crown and shouting:
'Long live King Nitechka! Long live he! Long live he! And let him be the Princess' husband and let
him reign happily!'
So the merry little Tailor reigned happily for a long time, and the rain never fell in his kingdom."
162 



This fairy-tale constitutes a specific example of a more general type of story: that is, the story of the
"god who binds."45 The god who binds might be Marduk, who encloses Tiamat in a net given to him by
his father, Anu - in which case the binding is clearly benevolent (even "world-engendering"). Binding may
also be conceptualized as the prerogative of the sovereign, who binds his "enemies" - that is, those who
threaten the stability of the kingdom - with cords, ropes and legal strictures. Binding brings order, in short
- but too much order can be dangerous. The closing line of The Jolly Tailor informs us that rain never falls
in the newly-established kingdom. While this might sound like a happy ending, to those who have been
recently inundated with water, it isn't so suitable a trick, if it engenders a drought. We may turn to another
literary example, to illustrate this point.
In the famous children's novel A Wrinkle in Time, a small boy with magical powers becomes inhabited
by a powerful patriarchal "extra-terrestrial" spirit, while trying to rescue his father from "dark powers"
threatening the universe. While possessed, this boy - Charles Wallace - remarks to his sister:
"'...you've got to stop fighting and relax. Relax and be happy. Oh, Meg, if you'd just relax you'd
realize that all our troubles are over. You don't understand what a wonderful place we've come to. You
see, on this planet everything is in perfect order because everybody has learned to relax, to give in, to
submit. All you have to do is look quietly and steadily into the eyes of our good friend, here, for he is
our friend, dear sister, and he will take you in as he has taken me.'"46
Everyone who inhabits the state dominated by "the good friend" behaves in a programmatic, and
identical manner. Anyone who differs is "adjusted," painfully, or eliminated. There is no space for disorder
of any type:
"Charles Wallace's strange, monotonous voice ground against her ears. 'Meg, you're supposed to have
some mind. Why do you think we have wars at home? Why do you think people get confused and
unhappy? Because they all live their own, separate, individual lives. I've been trying to explain to you in
the simplest possible way that [in this state] individuals have been done away with.... [here there is]
ONE mind. It's IT. And that's why everybody is so happy and efficient....'
'Nobody suffers here,' Charles intoned. 'Nobody is ever unhappy.'"47
The (necessary) meaning-constraint typical of a given culture is a consequence of uniformity of
behavior, imposed by that culture, towards objects and situations. The push towards uniformity is a primary
characteristic of the "patriarchal" state (as everyone who acts in the same situation-specific manner has
been rendered comfortably "predictable"). The state becomes increasingly tyrannical, however, as the
pressure for uniformity increases. As the drive towards similarity becomes extreme, everyone becomes the
"same" person - that is, imitation of the past becomes total. All behavioral and conceptual variability is
thereby forced from the body politic. The state then becomes truly static: paralyzed or deadened - turned to
stone, in mythological language. Lack of variability in action and ideation renders society - and the
individuals who compose it - increasingly vulnerable to precipitous "environmental" transformation (that
is, to an involuntary influx of "chaotic" changes). It is possible to engender a complete social collapse, by
constantly resisting incremental change. It is in this manner that the gods become displeased with their
creation, man - and his willful stupidity - and wash away the world. The necessity for interchange of
information between "known" and "unknown" means that the state risks its own death by requiring an
excess of uniformity. This risk is commonly given narrative representation as "the senescence and frailty of
the old King," or as "the King's mortal illness, brought on by lack of 'water' (which is "precosmogonic
chaos," in its positive aspect)." Such "ideas" are well illustrated in the Brother's Grimm fairy-tale The
Water of Life:
 348
"There once was a king who was so ill that it was thought impossible his life could be saved. He had
three sons, and they were all in great distress on his account, and they went into the castle gardens and
wept at the thought that he must die. An old man came up to them and asked the cause of their grief.
They told him that their father was dying, and nothing could save him.
The old man said, "There is only one remedy which I know. It is the Water of Life. If he drinks of it
he will recover, but it is very difficult to find."
163 









The two eldest sons determine to seek out the Water of Life, one after the other, after gaining their
father's reluctant permission. They both encounter a dwarf, at the beginning of their journeys, and speak
rudely to him. The dwarf places a curse on them, in consequence of their pride, and they each end up stuck
fast in a mountain gorge.
The "youngest son" then sets out. He is humble, and has the "right attitude" towards what he does not
understand. When he encounters the dwarf, therefore - who plays out the same role as the Gypsy woman in
The Jolly Tailor - he receives some valuable information:
"'As you have spoken pleasantly to me, and not been haughty like your false brothers, I will help you
and tell you how to find the Water of Life. It flows from a fountain in the courtyard of an enchanted
castle.349 But you will never get in unless I give you an iron rod and two loaves of bread. With the rod
strike three times on the iron gate of the castle and it will spring open. Inside you will find two lions
with wide-open jaws, but if you throw a loaf to each they will be quiet. Then you must make haste to
fetch the Water of Life before it strikes twelve, or the gates of the castle will close, and you will be shut
in.'"
The story is making a point: when you don't know where you are going, it is counter-productive to
assume that you know how to get there. This point is a specific example of a more general moral: Arrogant
("prideful") individuals presume they know who and what is important. This makes them too haughty to
pay attention when they are in trouble - too haughty, in particular, to attend to those things or people they
habitually hold in contempt. The "drying up of the environment" or the "senescence of the king" is a
consequence of a too-rigid - too arrogant - value hierarchy. ("What or who can reasonably be ignored" is
as much a part of such a hierarchy as "who or what must be attended too.") When trouble arrives, the
traditional value-hierarchy must be revised. This means that the formerly humble and despised may
suddenly hold the secret to continued life350 - and that those who refuse to admit to their error, like the
"elder brothers," will inevitably encounter trouble). The story continues:
"The Prince thanked him, took the rod and the loaves, and set off. When he reached the castle all was
just as the dwarf had said. At the third knock the gates flew open, and when he had pacified the lions
with their loaves, he walked into the castle. In the great hall he found several enchanted princes, and he
took the rings from their fingers. He also took a sword and a loaf which were lying by them."
The enchanted princes might be regarded as equivalent, in an important sense, to Osiris - to the
"ancestral hero," whose potential lay unutilized in the underworld, after his dismemberment by Seth. The
enchanted princes are ancestral forces, with magical powers (like the "dead kings" in the churchyard dream
we discussed earlier). The young prince's voyage into the "enchanted castle" is equivalent to a voluntary
descent into the dangerous kingdom of the dead. His "encounter with the dead ancestors" allows him access
to some of their power (in the guise of their tools and other belongings). The young prince also encounters
the "benevolent aspect of the unknown" in the underworld, as might well be expected - in her typical
personification:
"On passing into the next room he found a beautiful maiden, who rejoiced at his coming. She embraced
him and said that he had saved her, and if he would come back in a year she would marry him. She also
told him where to find the fountain with the enchanted water, but she said he must make haste to get out
of the castle before the clock struck twelve.
Then he went on and came to a room where there was a beautiful bed freshly made, and as he was
very tired he thought he would take a little rest. So he lay down and fell asleep. When we woke it was a
quarter to twelve. He sprang up in a fright, and ran to the fountain and took some of the water in a cup
which was lying nearby, and then hurried away. The clock struck just as he reached the iron gate, and it
banged so quickly that it took off a bit of his heel.
He rejoiced at having got some of the Water of Life, and hastened on his homeward journey. He
again passed the dwarf, who said when he saw the sword and the loaf, 'Those things will be of much
service to you. You will be able to strike down whole armies with the sword, and the loaf will never
come to an end.'"
164 







The sword and the loaf are the concrete forms taken by the "possibility" released during the Prince's
heroic journey into the terrible unknown. The sword is a tool which might find its use in the battle with
negative forces. The loaf is magical, in the same manner as the loaves and fishes in the story of Christ's
miraculous provendor:
"In those days, when again a great crowd had gathered, and they had nothing to eat, he called his
disciples to him, and said to them,
'I have compassion on the crowd, because they have been with me now three days, and have nothing to
eat;
and if I send them away hungry to their homes, they will faint on the way; and some of them have come

a long way.'
And his disciples answered him, 'How can one feed these men with bread here in the desert?'

And he asked them, 'How many loaves have you?' They said, 'Seven.'
And he commanded the crowd to sit down on the ground; and he took the seven loaves, and having
given thanks he broke them and gave them to his disciples to set before the people; and they set them

before the crowd.
And they had a few small fish; and having blessed them, he commanded that these also should be set

before them.
And they ate, and were satisfied; and they took up the broken pieces left over, seven baskets full.
And there were about four thousand people.
And he sent them away; and immediately he got into the boat with his disciples, and went to the district

of Dalmanu'tha.
The Pharisees came and began to argue with him, seeking from him a sign from heaven, to test him.

And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and said, 'Why does this generation seek a sign? Truly, I say to you,
no sign shall be given to this generation.'
And he left them, and getting into the boat again he departed to the other side.
Now they had forgotten to bring bread; and they had only one loaf with them in the boat.

And he cautioned them, saying, 'Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of
Herod.'
And they discussed it with one another, saying, 'We have no bread.'
And being aware of it, Jesus said to them, 'Why do you discuss the fact that you have no bread? Do you
not yet perceive or understand? Are your hearts hardened?

Having eyes do you not see, and having ears do you not hear? And do you not remember?

When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take
up?' They said to him, 'Twelve.'
'And the seven for the four thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?' And
they said to him, 'Seven.'
And he said to them, 'Do you not yet understand?'" (Mark 8:1-21, RSV)
The hero provides "food that never ends."
Back to the story: the dwarf tells the Prince where his brothers can be found - warning him that they
have bad hearts, and should be left to their fate. The young Prince seeks them out, nevertheless, rescues
them, and tells them everything that has happened.
"Then they rode away together and came to a land where famine and war were raging. The King thought
he would be utterly ruined, so great was the destitution.
The Prince went to him and gave him the loaf, and with it he fed and satisfied his whole kingdom.
The Prince also gave him his sword, and he smote the whole army of his enemies with it, and then he
was able to live in peace and quiet. Then the Prince took back his sword and his loaf, and the three
brothers rode on.
But later they had to pass through two more countries where war and famine were raging, and each
time the Prince gave his sword and his loaf to the King and in this way he saved three kingdoms."
165 



The tale takes this diversion to help drive home the general utility of what has been rescued from the
"enchanted kingdom, where the princess dwells." The treasures released from that kingdom have a
powerful, protective, revitalizing capacity, no matter where they are applied.
The brothers continue homeward, but the older two deceive the younger on the voyage, exchanging the
true Water of Life for salt sea water (the "arrogant elder brothers" replace the "benevolent aspect of the
Great Mother" with her "destructive counterpart"). When he arrives at home, the younger son unwittingly
gives this poisonous water to his father - making him sicker. The older brothers then heal the poisoned king
with the genuine but stolen Water, masking their evil souls with the appearance of benevolence, and
arrange to have their unfortunate sibling banished and killed. The huntsman assigned to do the killing
cannot bring himself to do it, however, and allows the young Prince to escape. Then the tide starts to turn.
The previous generous exploits of the young Prince are revealed, and the old King repents:
"After a time three wagonloads of gold and precious stones came to the King for his youngest son. They
were sent by the kings who had been saved by the Prince's sword and miraculous loaf, and who now
wished to show their gratitude.
Then the old King thought, 'What if my son really was innocent?' And he said to his people, 'If only
he were still alive! How sorry I am that I ordered him to be killed.'
'He is still alive,' said the huntsman. 'I could not find it in my heart to carry out your commands.'
And he told the King what had taken place.
A load fell from the King's heart on hearing the good news, and he sent out a great proclamation to
all parts of his kingdom that his son was to come home, where he would be received with great favor."
In the meantime, the Princess is preparing for the return of the prince. She
"... had caused a road to be made of pure shining gold leading straight to her castle, and told her people
that whoever came riding straight along it would be her true bridegroom, and they were to admit him.
But anyone who came either on one side of the road or the other would not be the right one, and he was
not to be let in.
When the year had almost passed, the eldest Prince thought that he would hurry to the Princess, and
by giving himself out as her deliverer would gain a wife and a kingdom as well. So he rode away, and
when he saw the beautiful golden road he thought it would be a thousand pities to ride upon it, so he
turned aside and rode to the right of it. But when he reached the gate the people told him that he was not
the right bridegroom, and he had to go away.
Soon after the second Prince came, and when he saw the golden road he thought it would be a
thousand pities for his horse to tread upon it, so he turned and rode up on the left of it. But when he
reached the gate he also was told that he was not the true bridegroom, and like his brother was turned
away."
The two elder Princes are too bound up in their traditional thoughts of power, wealth and glory to
concentrate on what is of true importance. Because of their "great respect" for the gold that makes up the
road, they miss a great opportunity. Their over-arching admiration for material goods blinds them to the
possibility of establishing a relationship with the source of all good things - in the guise of the princess
(playing a "part" similar to that of the Wisdom of Solomon). The youngest son makes no such mistake:
"When the year had quite come to an end, the third Prince came out of the wood to ride to his beloved,
and through her to forget all his past sorrows. So on he went, thinking only of her and wishing to be with
her, and he never even saw the golden road. His horse cantered right along the middle of it, and when he
reached the gate it was flung open and the Princess received him joyfully, and called him her deliverer
and the lord of her kingdom. Their marriage was celebrated without delay and with much rejoicing.
When it was over, she told him that his father had called him back and forgiven him. To he went to him
and told him everything: how his brothers had deceived him, and how they had forced him to keep
166 



silence. The old King wanted to punish them, but they had taken a ship and sailed away over the sea,
and never came back as long as they lived."
The old King is dying for lack of water. He has two elder sons, who could rescue him, but they are narrowminded,
traditional, materialistic, selfish and rigid. They lack proper "spirit" for the quest. The youngest
son - a proper hero - pays attention to what the "sensible" ignore, makes a voyage into the unknown, and
brings back what is needed. It is the journey of the hero that revitalizes the king. Osiris languishes in the
underworld - regardless of past greatness -without Horus.
It was the emergence of the heroic stance, mythically represented by man as equal in divinity to the
unknown or Nature, that provided the precondition for the generation of concrete behavioral adaptations to
the world of experience. Emergence of heroism meant construction of culture: historically-determined
procedural knowledge and communicable description thereof. Construction of culture is creation of the
mythic Great and Terrible Father, tyrant and wise king, as intermediary between the vulnerable individual
and the overwhelming natural world. This Father is the consequence of voluntary heroic action -
temporally summed and integrated effect of creative exploratory behavior, constantly engendered and
interpersonally transmitted, in the face of the eternally threatening and promising unknown - as well as
progenitor of those who take heroic action. This paradoxical child-and-father-of-the-hero is primarily
"personality" (procedure) and only secondarily abstracted first and second-order representation thereof
(and is most certainly not cumulative description of the "objective" world). That this is so can be seen, even
today, when the members of totalitarian cultures such as the modern North Korean collapse into genuine
hysteria as a consequence of the death of their leader, who is embodiment of order and determinate
meaning. Such tendencies are not restricted to those dominated by the totalitarian, either. Frye states:
"The function of the king is primarily to represent, for his subjects, the unity of their society in an
individual form. Even yet Elizabeth II can draw crowds wherever she appears, not because there is
anything remarkable about her appearance, but because she dramatizes the metaphor of society as a
single 'body.' Other societies have other figures, but there seems to be a special symbolic eloquence,
even a pathos, about the de jure monarch, whose position has been acquired by the pure accident of
birth, and who has no executive power. At the same time most societies have done away with
monarchical figures; 'charismatic' leaders, dictators, and the like are almost invariably sinister and
regressive; the mystique of royalty that Shakespeare's plays take for granted means little to us now; and
theologians talking about the 'sovereignty' of God risk alienating their readers by trying to assimilate
the religious life to the metaphors of a barbaric and outmoded form of social organization. It is natural
that our news media should employ the royal metaphor so incessantly in telling us about what France or
Japan or Mexico 'is' doing, as though they were individual beings. But the same figure was used in my
younger days, to my own great annoyance, to boost the prestige of dictators: 'Hitler is building roads
across Germany,' 'Mussolini is draining the marshes in Italy,' and the like. Those who employed this
figure were often democratic people who simply could not stop themselves from using the royal
metaphor. It seems as though the sovereign may be either the most attractive of icons or the most
dangerous of idols."51
The Great Father is a product of history - or, is history itself, insofar as it is acted out and spontaneously
remembered - intrapsychically instantiated during the course of socialization, and embedded in the social
interactions and specific object-meanings that make up a given culture. This culturally-determined structure
- this inhibitory network, this intrapsychic representative of the social unit - provides experiential
phenomena with determinate significance. This determinate significance is restricted meaning - reduced
from the general meaning of the unknown, per se, to the particular - and not relevance or import added to a
neutral background. The unknown manifests itself in an intrinsically meaningful manner: a manner
composed of threat and promise. The specific meaning of objects discriminated from unknown consists of
restrictions of that general significance (often, of restrictions to zero - to irrelevance). Such restriction is,
however, purely conditional, and remains intact only as long as the culturally-determined model of
meaning itself maintains its functional utility (including credibility). "Maintains its functional utility"
means - insofar as the culture posits a reasonable current description, a believable end goal, and a workable
167 
mode of transforming the former into the latter (workable for the individual, and for the maintenance and
expansion of the culture itself).

Figure 41: Order, the Great Father, as Son of the Uroboros
Figure 41: Order, the Great Father, as Son of the Uroboros 352 schematically portrays the Great Father
as "masculine offspring" of "precosmogonic chaos"; as embodiment of the known, the predictable, the
familiar; as security and tyranny simultaneously. The Great Father is patriarchal society, tradition, pomp
and circumstance, military-industrial complex, and super-ego: demanding, rigid, unjust, dangerous and
necessary. He is ambivalent, in precisely the same manner as the Great Mother, his "wife." In the guise of
literal father, he is protection for children, who are too immature and vulnerable to deal with the unknown.
More abstractly, he is the pattern of behavior the father represents, that becomes "internalized" during
maturation. The Great Father takes the infinite possibility of spirit that the infant represents and forges it
into something limited but actual. He is manner incarnate, ruling all social interactions.
Figure 42: Explored Territory as Orderly, Protective Father 353 presents the Great Father as wise King,
as security. The wise King maintains stability, not because he is afraid of the unknown, but because nothing
new can be built without a strong foundation. He is the adaptive routines, developed by the heroes of the
past, whose adoption by those in the present allows for control and safety. He is a house with doors; a
structure that shelters, but does not stifle; a master who teaches and disciplines but does not indoctrinate or
crush. He represents the tradition fostering cooperation among people whose shared culture makes trust
easy - among people whose immediate familiarity banishes the fear normally produced by the "other." The
168 
Great Father as Wise King keeps one foot on the Terrible Mother - keeps the monsters of chaos locked up
in his dungeon or banished to the nether regions of the kingdom. He is the personality of dead heroes (that
is, the action patterns and hierarchies of value established through exploration in the past) organized
according to the principle of "respect for the intrinsic value of the living" - or, it might be said. This makes
him the King who takes advice from his subjects - who is willing to enter into creative interchange with
those he "dominates," legally - and to benefit from this "advice from the unworthy."
Figure 42: Explored Territory as Orderly, Protective Father

169 


"Knowledge" of the necessity for such interplay between "strong and weak" emerged into explicit
Western consciousness not least through the actions of the ancient Hebrew prophets. The philosopher of
religion Huston Smith draws two examples from the Bible, to illustrate this point:
"One is the story of Naboth who, because he refused to turn over his family vineyard to King Ahab, was
framed on false charges of blasphemy and subversion and then stoned; as blasphemy was a capital
crime, his property then reverted to the throne. When news of this travesty reached Elijah, the word of
the Lord came to him, saying,
["Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who is in Sama'ria; behold, he is in the vineyard of
Naboth, where he has gone to take possession.
And you shall say to him, 'Thus says the LORD, "Have you killed, and also taken possession?"' and
you shall say to him, 'Thus says the LORD: "In the place where dogs licked up the blood of Naboth
shall dogs lick your own blood."'" (1 Kings 21:18:19 RSV)]
The story carries revolutionary significance for human history, for it is the story of how someone
without official position took the side of a wronged man and denounced a king to his face on grounds of
injustice. One will search the annals of history in vain for its parallel. Elijah was not a priest. He had no
formal authority for the terrible judgment he delivered. The normal pattern of the day would have called
for him to be struck down by bodyguards on the spot. But the fact that he was 'speaking for' an
authority not his own was so transparent that the king accepted Elijah's pronouncement as just.
The same striking sequence recurred in the incident of David and Bathsheba. From the top of his roof
David glimpsed Bathsheba bathing and wanted her. There was an obstacle, however: she was married.
To the royalty of those days this was a small matter; David simply moved to get rid of her husband.
Uriah was ordered to the front lines, carrying instructions that he be placed in the thick of the fighting
and support withdrawn so he would be killed. Everything went as planned; indeed, the procedure
seemed routine until Nathan the prophet got wind of it. Sensing immediately that 'the thing that David
had done displeased the Lord,' he went straight to the king, who had absolute power over his life, and
said to him:
[Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, "I anointed you king over Israel, and I delivered you out of the
hand of Saul;
and I gave you your master's house, and your master's wives into your bosom, and gave you the house
of Israel and of Judah; and if this were too little, I would add to you as much more.
Why have you despised the word of the LORD, to do what is evil in his sight? You have smitten Uri'ah
the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his wife to be your wife, and have slain him with the sword of
the Ammonites.
Now therefore the sword shall never depart from your house, because you have despised me, and have
taken the wife of Uri'ah the Hittite to be your wife."
Thus says the LORD, "Behold, I will raise up evil against you out of your own house; and I will take
your wives before your eyes, and give them to your neighbor, and he shall lie with your wives in the
sight of this sun.
For you did it secretly; but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun."
David said to Nathan, "I have sinned against the LORD." And Nathan said to David, "The LORD also
has put away your sin; you shall not die.
Nevertheless, because by this deed you have utterly scorned the LORD, the child that is born to you
shall die." (2 Samuel 12:7-14)]
The surprising point in each of these accounts is not what the kings do, for they were merely
exercising the universally accepted prerogatives of royalty in their day. The revolutionary and
unprecedented fact is the way the prophets challenged their actions."54

Smith concludes:
170 



"Stated abstractly, the Prophetic Principle can be put as follows: The prerequisite of political stability is
social justice, for it is in the nature of things that injustice will not endure. Stated theologically, this
point reads: God has high standards. Divinity will not put up forever with exploitation, corruption and
mediocrity."55
The initially "undeclarable" constraint of "respect for the weaker" provides the precondition for the
emergence of abstract and statable principles of social justice. Societies that lack such constraint - or that
come, over time, to forget the necessity of such constraint - risk the "vengeance of God":
Thus says the LORD: "For three transgressions of Moab, and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because he burned to lime the bones of the king of Edom.
So I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the strongholds of Ker'ioth, and Moab shall die
amid uproar, amid shouting and the sound of the trumpet;

I will cut off the ruler from its midst, and will slay all its princes with him," says the LORD.
Thus says the LORD: "For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because they have rejected the law of the LORD, and have not kept his statutes, but their lies have led
them astray, after which their fathers walked.
So I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the strongholds of Jerusalem."
Thus says the LORD: "For three transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because they sell the righteous for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes -
they that trample the head of the poor into the dust of the earth, and turn aside the way of the afflicted; a
man and his father go in to the same maiden, so that my holy name is profaned;

they lay themselves down beside every altar upon garments taken in pledge; and in the house of their
God they drink the wine of those who have been fined.
"Yet I destroyed the Amorite before them, whose height was like the height of the cedars, and who was
as strong as the oaks; I destroyed his fruit above, and his roots beneath.
Also I brought you up out of the land of Egypt, and led you forty years in the wilderness, to possess the
land of the Amorite.
And I raised up some of your sons for prophets, and some of your young men for Nazirites. Is it not

indeed so, O people of Israel?" says the LORD.
"But you made the Nazirites drink wine, and commanded the prophets, saying, `You shall not

prophesy.'
"Behold, I will press you down in your place, as a cart full of sheaves presses down.
Flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong shall not retain his strength, nor shall the mighty save
his life;
he who handles the bow shall not stand, and he who is swift of foot shall not save himself, nor shall he
who rides the horse save his life; and he who is stout of heart among the mighty shall flee away naked in

that day," says the LORD. (Amos 2:1-16 RSV)
Such societies are tyrannical. Tyrannical societies violate the implicit principles upon which society itself
is founded. This renders them self-defeating.356
Figure 43: Explored Territory as Tyrannical Father 357 presents the forces of tradition as "sondevouring
King." The conservative tendency of any culture, striving to maintain itself, can easily transform
into the deadening weight of absolute authority. The Great Father as tyrant destroys what he once was, and
undermines what he still depends upon. The tyrant is the force of everything that has been - including
everything that once was good - against everything that could be. This is the aspect of the Great Father that
motivates adolescent rebellion; that gives rise to ideological narratives attributing to society everything that
produces the negative in man. It is the Tyrannical Father who consumes his own children, and who walls
up the virgin princess in an inaccessible place. The Tyrannical Father rules absolutely, while the kingdom
withers or becomes paralyzed; his decrepitude and age are matched only by his arrogance, inflexibility, and
blindness to evil. He is the personification of the authoritarian or totalitarian state, whose "goal" is
reduction of all who are currently living to manifestation of a single dead "past" personality. When
everyone is the same, everything is predictable; all things are of strictly determinable value, and everything
171 
unknown (and fear-provoking) is hidden from view. Unfortunately, of course, every unpredictable and fearprovoking
thing is also informative, and new information is vital to continued successful adjustment.
Figure 43: Explored Territory as Tyrannical Father
The Great Father in his dual guise is the taboo, the barrier set up against the intrusion of the dangerously
unpredictable, the floodgate that controls the ocean behind. He is protection for fools, and impediment to
genius, and precondition for genius, and punishment for fools. His ambivalence is unavoidable, and should
be recognized, for such recognition serves as effective antidote to naive ideologically-motivated utopian
thought. Anything that protects and fosters (and that is therefore predictable and powerful) necessarily has
172 



the capacity to smother and oppress (and may manifest those capacities, unpredictably, in any given
situation). No static political utopia is therefore possible, in consequence - and the kingdom of god remains
spiritual, not worldly. Recognition of the essentially ambivalent nature of the predictable - stultifying, but
secure - means discarding simplistic theories which attribute the existence of human suffering and evil
purely to the state, or which presume that the state is all that is good, and that the individual should exist
merely as subordinate or slave. The king is a wall. Walls provide a barrier to the sudden influx of the
unknown, and block progress forward. One function presupposes the other (although either may certainly
come to dominate). Figure 44: The "Heavenly Genealogy" of the Tyrannical and Protective Fathers
portrays the relationship between the two discriminable aspects of the known, their derivation from the
unified but ambivalent known, and their original "descent" from the "dragon of chaos."

Figure 44: The "Heavenly Genealogy" of the Tyrannical and Protective Fathers
The Great Father is order, vs chaos; the past, vs the present; the old, vs the young. He is the ancestral
spirit whose force extends beyond the grave, who must be kept at bay with potent and humble ritual. He is
the single personality composed of the consequences of the eternal war between all the great heroes of the
past, and he stands over the developing individual, in the guise of the actual father, like a god. The Great
Father is the old emperor, now dangerously out of date - a powerful warrior in his youth, now under the
spell of a hostile force. He is the eternal impediment to the virgin bride; the tyrannical father who wishes to
keep his fruitful daughter firmly under his control. He is the authoritarian who rules the land ravaged by
drought; is ruler of the castle in which everything has been brought to a standstill.
173 

The Great Father is protection and necessary aid to growth - but absolute identification with his
personality and force ultimately destroys the spirit. Culture, career and role do not sufficiently exhaust the
possibilities of the individual. Figure 45 therefore portrays The Exploratory Hero - scion of chaos and
order - as Son of the Great Father. 358
?H?O?
SECURIT T R?
Ob??b
Saa?tr St??ttat?att?k
The Exploratory Hero as Son of the Great Father
174 



CHAPTER 3: APPRENTICESHIP AND ENCULTURATION: ADOPTION OF A SHARED MAP

Ideologies may be regarded as incomplete myths - as partial stories, whose compelling nature is a
consequence of the appropriation of mythological ideas. The philosophy attributing individual evil to the
pathology of social force constitutes one such partial story. Although society, the Great Father, has a
tyrannical aspect, he also shelters, protects, trains and disciplines the developing individual - and places
necessary constraints on his thought, emotion and behavior.
Subjugation to lawful authority might more reasonably be considered in light of the metaphor of the
apprenticeship. Childhood dependency must be replaced by group membership, prior to the development of
full maturity. Such membership provides society with another individual to utilize as a "tool," and provides
the maturing but still vulnerable individual with necessary protection (with a group-fostered "identity").
The capacity to abide by social rules, regardless of the specifics of the discipline, can therefore be
regarded as a necessary transitional stage in the movement from childhood to adulthood.
Discipline should therefore be regarded as a skill that may be developed through adherence to strict
ritual, or by immersion within a strict belief system or hierarchy of values. Once such discipline has been
attained, it may escape the bounds of its developmental precursor. It is in this manner that true freedom is
attained. It is at this level of analysis that all genuine religious and cultural traditions and dogmas are
equivalent, regardless of content: they are all masters whose service may culminate in the development of
self-mastery, and consequent transcendence of tradition and dogma.
Adoption of this analytic standpoint allows for a certain moral relativism, conjoined with an absolutist
higher-order morality. The particulars of a disciplinary system may be somewhat unimportant. The fact
that adherence to such a system is necessary, however, cannot be disregarded.
Apprenticeship is necessary, but should not on that account be glamorized. Dogmatic systems make
harsh and unreasonable masters. Systems of belief and moral action - and those who are identified with
them - are concerned above all with self-maintenance and preservation of predictability and order. The
(necessarily) conservative tendencies of great systems makes them tyrannical, and more than willing to
crush the spirit of those they "serve." Apprenticeship is a precursor to freedom, however - and nothing
necessary and worthwhile is without its danger.
We are all familiar with the story of benevolent nature, threatened by the rapacious forces of the corrupt
individual and the society of the machine. The plot is solid, the characters believable - but Mother Nature
is also malarial mosquitoes, parasitical worms, cancer and Sudden Infant Death Syndrome. The story of
peaceful and orderly tradition, undermined by the incautious and decadent (with the ever-present threat of
chaos lurking in the background) is also familiar, and compelling, and true - except that the forces of
tradition, however protective, tend to be blind, and to concern themselves more with their own stability
than with the well-being of those subject to them.
We have all heard and identified with the story of the brave pioneer, additionally - plough in hand,
determined to wrest the good life and the stable state from the intransigent forces of nature - although we
may be sporadically aware that the "intransigent forces" shaped so heroically included the now-decimated
original inhabitants of our once-foreign landscape.
We all know, finally, the story of the benevolent individual, genuine and innocent, denied access to the
nourishing forces of the true and natural world, corrupted by the unreasonable strictures of society. This
story has its adherents, as well - not least because it is reassuring to believe that everything "bad" stems
from without, rather than within.
These stories are all ideologies (and there are many more of them). Ideologies are attractive, not least to
the educated modern mind - credulous, despite its skepticism - particularly if those who embody or
otherwise promote them allow the listener every opportunity to identify with the creative and positive
characters of the story, and to deny their association with the negative. Ideologies are also powerful, and
dangerous. Their power stems from their incomplete but effective appropriation of mythological ideas.
175 







Their danger stems from their attractiveness, in combination with their incompleteness. Ideologies only tell
part of the story - and they tell that part as if it were complete. This means that they do not take into
account vast "stretches" of the world. It is incautious to act in the world, as if only a set of its "constituent
elements" exist. The "ignored elements" conspire, so to speak, as a consequence of their "repression" - and
make their existence known, inevitably, in some undesirable manner.
Knowledge of the grammar of mythology might well constitute an antidote to ideological gullibility.
Genuine myths are capable of representing the totality of conflicting forces, operating in any given
situation. Every positive force has its omnipresent and eternal "enemy." The beneficial aspect of the
"natural environment" is therefore viewed in light of its capacity to arbitrarily inflict suffering and death.
The protective and sheltering capacity of society is therefore understood in light of its potent tendency to
tyranny and the elimination of necessary diversity. The heroic aspect of the individual is regarded in light
of the ever-lurking figure of the adversary: arrogant, cowardly, and cruel. A story accounting for all of
these "constituent elements of reality" is balanced, and stable, in contrast to an ideology - and far less
likely to produce an outburst of social psychopathology. But the forces that make up the world as a forum
for action constantly war in opposition. How is it possible to lay a path between them, so to speak - to
configure a mode of being that takes "all things" into account, without being destroyed in the process? A
developmental account of the relationship between "the forces of the individual, society and chaos" might
aid in the comprehension of their proper interplay.
I counselled an immature thirty-something-year-old man at one point during my service as a
psychological intern. He was always working at cross-purposes to himself, placing obstacles in his path and
then tripping over them. (This was the literal truth, upon occasion. He was living with his mother, after the
failure of his marriage. I suggested that he start cleaning up his life, by cleaning up his room - which is a
more difficult step than might be casually presupposed, for someone habitually and philosophically
undisciplined. He placed a vacuum cleaner in the doorway of his bedroom, after getting about half-way
through the task. For a week he had to step over it - but he didn't move it, and he didn't finish the job. That
situation could reasonably be regarded as a polysemic sample of his life). This person had sought help
because his disintegrated marriage had produced a son, who he loved (or at least wanted to love). He came
to therapy because he didn't want his child to grow up badly, as he had. I tried to scare him into behaving
properly, because I believed (and believe) that terror is a great and underutilized motivator. (Anxiety -
which is ineradicable - can work against you, or for you). We spent a long time outlining, in great detail,
the consequences of his undisciplined behavior, to that point in his life (no successful career, no intimate
relationship, an infant son thrust into a broken family) and the likely long-term future results (increasing
self-disgust, cynicism about life, increased cruelty and revenge-seeking, hopelessness and despair). We also
discussed the necessity for discipline - that is, for adherence to a coherent and difficult moral code - for
himself and for his son.
Of course, he worried that any attempt on his part to shape the behavior of his son would interfere with
the natural development and flowering of the child's innate potential. So it might be said, using Jung's
terminology, that he was an "unconscious exponent, "59 for example, of the philosophy of Rousseau:
"With what simplicity I should have demonstrated that man is by nature good, and that only our
institutions have made him bad!"60
That is - the Rousseau who repeatedly placed his own children in foundling asylums, because their
existence was inconvenient to him (and, we must presuppose, to the flowering of his intrinsic goodness).
Anyway - the fervent hope of every undisciplined person (even an undisciplined genius) is that his current
worthlessness and stupidity is someone else's fault. If - in the best of cases - it is society's fault, then
society can be made to pay. This sleight-of-hand maneuver transforms the undisciplined into the admirable
rebel, at least in his own eyes, and allows him to seek unjustified revenge in the disguise of the
revolutionary hero. A more sickening and self-serving parody of heroic behavior can hardly be imagined.
One time my client came to me with a dream:
My son was asleep in his crib inside a small house. Lightning came in through his window, and bounced
around inside the house. The lightning was powerful, and beautiful, but I was afraid it would burn the
house down.
176 




Dream interpretation is a difficult and uncertain business, but I believed that this image was interpretable,
within the context of our ongoing discussions. The lightning represented the potential implicit in the infant.
This potential was an exceedingly strong and useful force - like electricity. But electricity is only useful
when harnessed. Otherwise it burns down houses.
I can't say much about the outcome of this particular case, as internship contact with those seeking
psychological help tends to be restricted in time. My client seemed, at least, more negatively affected by his
immature behavior - which struck me as a reasonable start; furthermore, he understood (at least explicitly,
although not yet procedurally) that discipline could be the father of the hero, and not just his enemy. The
dawning of such understanding meant the beginnings of a mature and healthy philosophy of life, on his
part. Such a philosophy was outlined in explicit detail by Friedrich Nietzsche - despite his theoretically
"antidogmatic" stance.
Nietzsche has been casually regarded as a great enemy of Christianity. I believe, however, that he was
consciously salutary in that role. When the structure of an institution has become corrupt - particularly
according to its own principles - it is the act of a friend to criticize it. Nietzsche is also viewed as fervid
individualist and social revolutionary - as the prophet of the superman, and the ultimate destroyer of
tradition. He was, however, much more sophisticated and complex than that. He viewed the "intolerable
discipline" of the Christian church, which he "despised," as a necessary and admirable precondition to the
freedom of the European spirit - a freedom he regarded as not yet fully realized:
"Every morality is, as opposed to laisser aller, a bit of tyranny against "nature"; also against "reason";
but this in itself is no objection, as long as we do not have some other morality which permits us to
decree that every kind of tyranny and unreason is impermissible. What is essential and inestimable in
every morality is that it constitutes a long compulsion: to understand Stoicism or Port-Royal or
Puritanism, one should recall the compulsion under which every language so far has achieved strength
and freedom - the metrical compulsion of rhyme and rhythm.
How much trouble the poets and orators of all peoples have taken - not excepting a few prose writers
today in whose ear there dwells an inexorable conscience - "for the sake of some foolishness," as
utilitarian dolts say, feeling smart - "submitting abjectly to capricious laws," as anarchists say, feeling
"free," even "free-spirited." But the curious fact is that all there is or has been on earth of freedom,
subtlety, boldness, dance, and masterly sureness, whether in thought itself or in government, or in
rhetoric and persuasion, in the arts just as in ethics, has developed only owing to the "tyranny of such
capricious laws"; and in all seriousness, the probability is by no means small that precisely this is
"nature" and "natural"- and not that laisser aller.
Every artist knows how far from any feeling of letting himself go his "most natural" state is - the free
ordering, placing, disposing, giving form in the moment of "inspiration" - and how strictly and subtly he
obeys thousandforld laws precisely then, laws that precisely on account of their hardness and
determination defy all formulation through concepts (even the firmest concept is, compared with them,
not free of fluctuation, multiplicity and ambiguity).
What is essential "in heaven and on earth" seems to be, to say it once more, that there should be
obedience over a long period of time and in a single direction: given that, something always develops,
and has developed, for whose sake it is worth while to live on earth; for example, virtue, art, music,
dance, reason, spirituality - something transfiguring, subtle, mad, and divine. The long unfreedom of the
spirit, the mistrustful constraint in the communicability of thoughts, the discipline thinkers imposed on
themselves to think within the directions laid down by a church or court, or under Aristotelian
presuppositions, the long spiritual will to interpret all events under a Christian schema and to rediscover
and justify the Christian god in every accident - all this, however forced, capricious, hard, gruesom, and
antirational, has shown itself to be the means through which the European spirit has been trained to
strength, ruthless curiosity, and subtle mobility, though admittedly in the process an irreplaceable
amount of strength and spirit had to be crushed, stifled, and ruined (for here, as everywhere, 'nature'
manifests herself as she is, in all her prodigal and indifferent magnificence, which is outrageous but
noble).
177 



That for thousands of years European thinkers thought merely in order to prove something - today,
conversely, we suspect every thinker who "wants to prove something" - that the conclusions that ought
to be the result of their most rigorous reflection were always settled from the start, just as it used to be
with Asiatic astrology, and still is today with the innocuous Christian-moral interpretation of our most
intimate personal experiences 'for the glory of God' and 'for the salvation of the soul' - this tyranny,
this caprice, this rigorous and grandiose stupidity has educated the spirit. Slavery is, as it seems, both in
the cruder and in the more subtle sense, the indispensable means of spiritual discipline and cultivation,
too. Consider any morality with this in mind: what there is in it of "nature" teaches hatred of the laisser
aller, of any all-too-great freedom, and implants the need for limited horizons and the nearest tasks -
teaching the narrowing of our perspective, and thus in a certain sense stupidity, as a condition of life and
growth.
'You shall obey - someone and for a long time: else you will perish and lose the last respect for
yourself" - this appears to me to be the categorical imperative of nature which, to be sure, is neither
"categorical" as the old Kant would have it (hence the 'else') nor addressed to the individual (what do
individuals matter to her?), but to peoples, races, ages, classes - but above all to the whole human
animal, to man."61
This is the philosophy of apprenticeship - useful for conceptualizing the necessary relationship between
subordination to a potent historically-constructed social institution and the eventual development of true
freedom.
A child cannot live on its own. Alone, it drowns in possibility. The unknown supersedes individual
adaptive capacity, in the beginning. It is only the transmission of historically determined behavioral
patterns - and, secondarily, their concomitant descriptions - that enables survival in youth. These patterns
of behavior and hierarchies of value - which children mimic and then learn expressly - give secure
structure to uncertain being. It is the group, initially in parental guise, that stands between the child and
certain psychological catastrophe. The depression, anxiety and physical breakdown that is characteristic of
early childhood separation from parents is the result of exposure to "too much unknown" and incorporation
of "too little cultural structure." The long period of human dependency must be met with the provision of a
stable social environment - with predictable social interactions, which meet individual motivational
demands; with the provision of behavioral patterns and schemas of value capable of transforming the
unpredictable and frightening unknown into its beneficial equivalent. This means that transformation of
childhood dependency means adoption of ritual behavior (even regular meal-and-bed-times are rituals) and
incorporation of a morality (a framework of reference) with an inevitably-metaphysical foundation.
Successful transition from childhood to adolescence means identification with the group, rather than
continued dependency upon the parents. Identification with the group provides the individual with an
alternative, generalized, non-parental source of protection from the unknown, and provides the group with
the resources of another soul. The group constitutes a historically-validated pattern of adaptation (specific
behaviors, descriptions of behavior, and general descriptions). The individual's identification with this
pattern strengthens him - when he needs to separate from his parents, and take a step towards adulthood -
and strengthens the group, insofar as it now has access to his individual abilities. The individual's
identification with this pattern bolsters his still-maturing ability to stand on his own two feet - supports his
"determination" to move away from the all-encompassing and too-secure maternal-dependent world.
Identity with the group therefore comes to replace recourse to parental authority as "way of being in the
face of the unknown" - provides structure for social relationships (with self and others), determines the
meaning of objects, provides desirable end as ideal, and establishes acceptable procedure (acceptable mode
for the "attainment of earthly paradise").
Personal identification with the group means socialization, individual embodiment of the valuations of
the group - primarily, as expressed in behavior. Group values constitute cumulative historical judgment
rendered on the relative importance of particular states of motivation, with due regard for intensity, as
expressed in individual action, in the social context. All societies are composed of individuals whose
actions constitute embodiment of the creative past. That creative past can be conceptualized as the
synthesis of all culture-creating exploratory communicative activity, including the act of synthesis itself.
178 









Myth comprises description of procedural knowledge; constitutes episodic/semantic representation of
cumulative behavioral wisdom, in increasingly abstracted form. Introduction of the previously-dependent
individual at adolescence to the world of ancestral behavior and myth constitutes transmission of culture -
inculcation of the Great Father, historically-determined personality and representation of such - as
adaptation to, explanation of, and protection against the unknown, the Great and Terrible Mother. This
introduction reaches its culmination with initiation, the primary ritual signifying cultural transmission - the
event which destroys the "unconscious" union between child and biological mother.
The child is born in a state of abject dependence. The caring mother is simultaneously individual force,
and embodiment of impersonal biological beneficience - is the "eternal" mythic Virgin mother, "material"
consort of God. The infant comes equipped with the ability to respond to this innately nurturing presence,
to develop a symbiotic relationship with his or her caregiver, and to grow increasingly strong. The
maturation of creative exploratory capacity - which constitutes the basis for mature self-reliance - appears
dependent for its proper genesis upon the manifestation of maternal solicitude: upon love, balanced
promotion of individual ability, and protection from harm. Tender touch and care seduces the infant to life,
to expansion of independence, to potential for individual strength and ability.362 The absence of such regard
means failure to thrive - means depression and intrapsychic damage, even death.363
The maturing individual necessarily (tragically, heroically) expands past the domain of paradisaic
maternal protection, in the course of development; necessarily attains an apprehension whose desire for
danger, whose need for life, exceeds the capability of maternal shelter. This means that the growing child
eventually comes to face problems - how to get along with peers, in peer-only play groups; how to select a
mate, from among a myriad of potential mates - that cannot be solved (indeed, may be made more
difficult) by involvement of the beneficial maternal. Such problems might be regarded as emergent
consequences of the process of maturation itself; of the increased possibility for action and comprehension
necessarily attendant upon maturation. A four-year old, making the transition to kindergarten, cannot use
three-year old habits and schemas of representation to make his way in the novel social world. A thirteenyear
old cannot use a "seven-year old" personality - no matter how healthy - to solve the problems
endemic to adolescence. The group steps in - most evidently, at the point of adolescence - and provides
"permeable" protective shelter to the child too old for the mother, but not old enough to stand alone. The
universally disseminated rituals of initiation - induced "spiritual" death and subsequent rebirth - catalyzes
the development of adult personality; follows the fundamental pattern of the cyclic, circular cosmogonic
myth. The culturally-determined rites and biological processes associated with initiation constitute absolute
destruction of childhood personality, of childhood dependence - initial non-self-conscious "paradisal"
stability - for necessary catalysis of group identification. Such rituals tend to be more complex and farreaching
for males than for females. This is perhaps in part because male development seems more easily
led astray, in a socially-harmful manner, than female (adolescent males are more delinquent and
aggressive364) and in part because female transition to adulthood is catalyzed "by nature" in the form of
comparatively rapid maturation and the naturally dramatic onset of menstruation.
The group to which the initiate is introduced consists of a complex interweaving of behavioral patterns
established and subsequently organized in the past, as a consequence of voluntary creative communicative
exploration. The group is the current expression of a pattern of behavior developed over the course of
hundreds of thousands of years. This pattern is constructed of behaviors established initially by creative
heroes - by individuals who were able and willing to do and to think something that no one had been able
to do or to think before. Integration of these behaviors into a stable hierarchy, and abstract representation of
them, in the course of a process beginning with imitation, and ending in semantic description, produces a
procedural and declarable structure whose incorporation dramatically increases the individual's behavioral
repertoire and his or her descriptive, predictive and representational ability. This incorporation - which is
primarily implicit, and therefore invisible - is identification with the group. Identification with the group
means the provision of determinate meaning, as the antidote to excruciating ignorance and exposure to
chaos.
A multitude of (specific) rituals have evolved to catalyze such identification. Catalysis often appears
necessary, as the movement to adolescence is vitally important, but psychologically challenging, involving
as it does "voluntary" sacrifice of childhood dependency [which is a valid form of adaptation, but
predicated upon (nondeclarative) assumptions suitable only to the childhood state]. Such transitional rituals
179 













are generally predicated upon enaction of the fundamental narrative structure - the Way - previously
presented. Ritual initiation, for example - a ubiquitous formal feature of pre-experimental culture 365 -
takes place at or about the onset of puberty, when it is critical for further psychological development and
continued tribal security that boys transcend their dependency upon their mothers. This separation often
takes place under purposefully frightening and violent conditions. In the general initation pattern, the men,
acting as a unit (as the embodiment of social history 366), separate the initiates from their mothers - who
offer a certain amount of more-or-less dramatized resistance, and some genuine sorrow (at the "death" of
their children).
The boys know that they are to be introduced to some monstrous power who exists in the night, in the
forest or cave, in the depths of the unknown. This power, capable of devouring them, serves as the
mysterious deity of the initiation. Once removed from their mothers, the boys begin their ritual. This
generally involves some mixture of induced regression of personality - reduction to the state of
"precosmogonic chaos," extant even prior to earliest childhood - and induction of overwhelming fear,
accompanied by severe physical or spiritual hardship or torture. The initiates are often forbidden to talk,
and may be fed by the men. They may be circumcised, mutilated, or interred alive - required to undergo
intense punishment, subjected to intense dread. They symbolically pass into the maw of the Terrible
Mother and are reborn as men, as adult members of the "tribe," which is the historical cumulation of the
consequences of adaptive behavior. (Initiates often actually pass, literally, through the body of some
constructed beast, aided by the elders of the tribe, who serve as the agents of this deity367). When the rite is
successfully completed, the initiated are no longer children, dependent upon the arbitrary beneficience of
nature - in the guise of their mothers - but are members of the tribe of men, active standard-bearers of their
particular culture, who have had their previously personality destroyed, so to speak, by fire - who have
successfully faced the worst trial they are likely ever to encounter in their lives.
The terror induced by ritual exposure to the forces of the unknown appears to put the brain into a state
characterized by enhanced suggestibility - or, at least, by dramatically heightened need for order, by need
for coherent and meaningful narrative. The person who is in a "state" where he know longer knows what to
do or what to expect is highly motivated to escape that state, by whatever means are necessary. The
stripping away of a former mode of adaptation, engendered by dramatic shift of social locale (of "context"),
produces within the psyche of those so treated a state of acute apprehension, and intense desire for the reestablishment
of predictability and sense. This acute apprehension is, as we have seen, the consequence of
the "renovelization" of the environment: sufficient challenge posed to the integrity of a previous
personality disrupts its structure, "freeing" phenomena previously adapted to from the grasp of familiar
action and valuation. The phenomena, thus "free," then once again "possess" sufficient "energy" to
motivate their reconceptualization (that is, to make of that process of reconceptualization something
sufficient vital and important to stamp itself into memory - into permanent incarnation as "personality").
The ritually "reduced" and terrified initiates, unable to rely on the adaptive strategies utilized during
their childhood, desperately need new explanations and new patterns of behavior to survive in what is, after
all, a new environment. That new environment is the society of men, where women are sexual partners and
equals instead of source of dependent comfort; where the provision of food and shelter is a responsibility,
and not a given; where security - final authority, in the form of parent - no longer exists. As the childhood
"personality" is destroyed, the adult personality - a manifestation of transmitted culture - is inculcated. The
general initiatory "narrative" or ritual is presented schematically in Figure 46: The "Death" and
"Rebirth" of the Adolescent Initiate.
The comparatively more abstracted rite of baptism is predicated upon similar principles. Baptism is the
dramatic or episodic representation of the act or ritual of initiation - or, at least, stands mid-way between
the entirely "unconscious" or procedural forms of initiation and their semantically abstracted symbolic
equivalents. Baptism is spiritual birth (rebirth), as opposed to birth of the flesh. The font of the church,
which contains the baptismal water, is a symbolic analog of the uterus368 (the uterus ecclesiastiae), which is
the "original" place that transforms precosmogonic chaos into spirit-embodied matter (into "personality").
When the initiate is plunged into (now sprinkled with) baptismal water, he or she is symbolically reduced,
from insufficient stability to chaos; is drowned as a profane being, and then resurrected; is re-united
(incestuously, mythically speaking) with the Great Mother, then reborn formally into the community of the
spirit.369 Such abstracted reductions to "death" and symbolic reconstructions constitute ritualization and
180 
representation of the processes endlessly necessary to revitalization of the individual personality and the
social group. Eliade states:

Figure 46: The "Death" and "Rebirth" of the Adolescent Initiate
"The majority of initiatory ordeals more or less clearly imply a ritual death followed by resurrection or a
new birth. The central moment of every initiation is represented by the ceremony symbolizing the death
of the novice and his return to the fellowship of the living. But he returns to life a new man, assuming
another mode of being. Initiatory death signifies the end at once of childhood, of ignorance, and of the
profane condition....
All the rites of rebirth or resurrection, and the symbols that they imply, indicate that the novice has
attained to another mode of existence, inaccessible to those who have not undergone the initiatory
ordeals, who have not tasted death. We must note this characteristic of the archaic mentality: the belief
that a state cannot be changed without first being annihilated - in the present instance, without the
child's dying to childhood. It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of this obsession with
beginnings, which, in sum, is the obsession with the absolute beginning, the cosmogony. For a thing to
be well done, it must be done as it was the first time. But the first time, the thing - this class of objects,
181 



this animal, this particular behavior - did not exist: when, in the beginning, this object, this animal, this
institution, came into existence, it was as if, through the power of the Gods, being arose from nonbeing.
Initiatory death is indispensable for the beginning of spiritual life. Its function must be understood in
relation to what it prepares: birth to a higher mode of being.... [I]nitiatory death is often symbolized, for
example, by darkness, by cosmic night, by the telluric womb, the hut, the belly of a monster. All these
images express regression to a preformal state, to a latent mode of being (complementary to the
precosmogonic Chaos), rather than total annihilation (in the sense in which, for example, a member of
the modern societies conceives death). These images and symbols of ritual death are inextricably
connected with germination, with embryology; they already indicate a new life in course of
preparation....
For archaic thought, then, man is made - he does not make himself all by himself. It is the old
initiates, the spiritual masters, who make him. But these masters apply what was revealed to them at the
beginning of Time by Supernatural Beings. They are only the representatives of these Beings; indeed, in
many cases, they incarnate them. This is as much as to say that in order to become a man, it is necessary
to resemble a mythical model."70
Groups are individuals, uniform in their acceptance of a collective historically-determined behavioral
pattern and schema of value. Internalization of this pattern, and the description thereof (the myths - and
philosophies, in more abstracted cultures - which accompany it), simultaneously produces ability to act in a
given (social) environment, to predict the outcomes of such action, and to determine the meaning of general
events (meaning inextricably associated with behavioral outcome). Such internalization culminates in the
erection of implicit procedural and explicit declarable structures of "personality," which are more or less
isomorphic in nature, which simultaneously constitute habit and moral knowledge. Habit, the former case,
is a way of being, a general strategy for "redemption" in the "natural" and "cultural" spheres, shaped by the
social exchange of affect-laden information, mastered to the point of "unconscious" automaticity. Moral
knowledge - wisdom, the latter case - is fixed representation of the (previously) "unknown"; is generation
of capacity to predict the behavior of objects, other people and the self. The sum total of accurate
behaviorally-linked representation of the world as forum for action constitutes the structure which reduces
the manifold meaning of the experiential plenum to a restricted and therefore manageable domain. This
manifold meaning is anxiety, on first contact (or under uncontrolled, overwhelming or involuntary
conditions of exposure) - anxiety, which would otherwise be generated in response to everything.
Interference with adolescent initiation-catalyzed group incarnation is therefore disruption of or failure to
(re)generate the structure providing for respite from unbearable existential anxiety.
A society "works" to the degree that it provides its members with the capacity to predict and control the
events in their experiential field - works, insofar as it provides a barrier, protection from the unknown or
unexpected. Culture provides a ritual model for behavioral emulation, and heuristics for desire and
prediction - provides active procedures for behavior in the social and non-social worlds, plus description of
processes in the social and non-social worlds, including behavioral processes. Incorporation of culture
therefore means fixed adaptation to the unknown; means, simultaneously, inhibition of novelty-induced
fear, regulation of interpersonal behavior, and provision of redemptive mode of being. The group is the
historical structure that humanity has erected between the individual and the terrible unknown. Intrapsychic
representation of culture - establishment of group identity - protects individuals from overwhelming fear
of their own experience; from contact with the a priori meaning of things and situations. This is the
intercession of the mythic Great Father against the terrible world of the Great Mother. This intercession is
provision of a specific goal-schema, allowing for the transformation of the vagaries of individual
experience into positive events, within a social context, in the presence of protection against the unbearable
unknown.
This historically-determined cultural structure is constructed of courageously engineered and creatively
integrated responses to situations that arise typically in the course of human experience, arranged in terms
of their relative importance, organized simultaneously to minimize intrapsychic motivational and external
interpersonal conflict, and to allow for continued adaptation. This (primarily non-verbal) sociallytransmitted
structure of assumption, expectation and behavior is very stable, under most circumstances. It
182 








has seen everything, and done everything, so to speak, and cannot be easily undermined. In most situations,
it efficiently governs social interaction, general expectation, and organization of goal-directed behavior. In
its implicit imitative, dramatic, narrative form, it is exceptionally durable, and highly resistant to naive
social revolution.371 However, such stability is only advantageous in stable times. Under exceptional
circumstances - when the environment shifts rapidly, for reasons independent of or dependent upon human
activity - the historical "personality" must be altered, or even qualitatively reconfigured, to allow equally
rapid adaptation to take place. This process of re-arrangement is necessarily predicated upon disruption
(death) of the old order. Dissolution of the old order means (potential) return of the determinate meaning of
experiential objects to their pre-classified state of chaos - simultaneously unbearably threatening and,
secondarily, infinitely promising. Apprehension of the inevitability of such dissolution - however vague -
constitutes one potent barrier to the process of creative re-adaptation.
The historical structure "protects itself" and its structure in two related manners. First, it inhibits
intrinsically rewarding but "anti-social" behaviors (those which might upset the stability of the group
culture) by associating them with certain punishment (or at least with the threat thereof). This punishment
might include actual application of undesirable penalties or, more "subtly" - removal of "right to serve as
recognized representative of the social structure." This means, in the latter case, forced individual forfeit of
identification with (imitation of, internalization of) said social structure (at least for the once-socialized),
and induction of overwhelming guilt or anxiety, as a consequence of goal loss, value dissolution, and
subsequent re-exposure to the novelty of decontextualized experience. It is the potential for such an
affectively-unbearable state that comprises the power of banishment, which can be used "consciously" by
societies to punish wrongdoers, or that can be experienced as a self-induced state, by individuals careless,
arrogant or ignorant enough to "kill" what supports them. 372
The culturally-determined historical structure protects and maintains itself secondly by actively
promoting individual participation in behavioral strategies that satisfy individual demand, and that
simultaneously increase the stability of the group. The socially-constructed way of a profession, for
example, allows the individual who incarnates that profession opportunity for meaningful activity in a
manner that supports or at least does not undermine the stability of the historically-determined structure
which regulates the function of his or her threat-response system. Adoption of a socially sanctioned
"professional personality" therefore provides the initiated-and-identified individual with peer-approved
opportunity for intrinsic goal-derived pleasure, and with relative freedom from punishment, shame and
guilt. Potentially upsetting competition between socially-sanctified ways of being, within a given social
group, is also subject to cultural minimization. Each of the many professions whose union comprises a
functioning complex society is the consequence of the heroic past activities which established the
profession, modified by the equally heroic activities that allowed for its maintenance and "update" (in the
presence of other competing activities and ever-changing "environmental" demand). "Lawyer" and
"physician," for example, are two embodied ideologies, nested within more complex overarching narrative
schemas, whose domains of activity, knowledge and competence have been delimited, one against the
other, until both can occupy the same "territory," without emergence of destructive and counterproductive
conflict. This is the "organization of dead kings," so to speak, under the dominion of the "hero": doctors
and lawyers are both subject to "higher-order (legal) principles" which govern their behavior such that one
can tolerate - at least within reason - the presence of the other.
The properly structured patriarchal system fulfills the needs of the present, while "taking into account"
those of the future; simultaneously, satisfies the demands of the self with those of the other. The suitability
of the "cultural solution" is judged by individual affective response. This grounding of verification in
universally constant affect, in combination with the additional constraints of stability and adaptability,
means inevitable construction of human groups - and human moral systems - with centrally identifiable
features and processes of generation. The construction of a successful group - the most difficult of feats -
means establishment of a society composed of individuals who act in their own interest (at least enough to
render their life bearable) and who, in doing so, simultaneously maintain and advance their culture. The
"demand to satisfy, protect and adapt, individually and socially" - and to do so over vast and variable
stretches of time - places severe "intrinsic" constraints on the manner in which "successful" human
societies can operate. It might be said that such constraints provide universal boundaries for acceptable
human morality. The nature of what constitutes such acceptability fosters direct conflict or debate, in terms
183 






of the details, but the broad picture is necessarily clear. That picture is presented and represented in ritual,
mythology and narrative, which eternally depict intrinsically meaningful themes, playing themselves out, in
eternally fascinating fashion. Nietzsche states:
"That individual philosophical concepts are not anything capricious or autonomously evolving, but grow
up in connection and relationship with each other; that, however suddenly and arbitrarily they seem to
appear in the history of thought, they nevertheless belong just as much to a system as all the members of
the fauna of a continent - is betrayed in the end also by the fact that the most diverse philosophers keep
filling in a definite fundamental scheme of possible philosophies. Under an invisible spell, they always
revolve once more in the same orbit; however independent of each other they may feel themselves with
their critical or systematic wills, something within them leads them, something impels them in a definite
order, one after the other - to wit, the innate systematic structure and relationship of their concepts.
Their thinking is, in fact, far less a discovery than a recognition, a remembering, a return and a
homecoming to a remote, primordial, and inclusive household of the soul, out of which those concepts
grew originally: philosophizing is to this extent a kind of atavism of the highest order."73
Adoption of a particular way of being allows, concurrently, for determination of the meaning of objects,
and the morality of behaviors. Objects attain significance according to their perceived utility -with regards
to their capacity to further movement away from the unbearable present towards the ideal future; likewise,
moral behavior is seen as furthering and immoral behavior as impeding or undermining such movement. Of
course, identification of what constitutes the basis for establishing the nature of morality or the comparative
value of objects is no simple matter. In fact, such judgment comprises the constant central demand of
adaptation. No fixed answer solution to this problem can be offered - this question, "the nature of the
highest ideal" or "the nature of the highest good" - because the environment which poses the query, so to
speak, constantly shifts, as time progresses (that shift constitutes, in fact, time's progression). The constant
fact of eternal change does not eliminate the utility of all "moral" answers, however, as such answers must
be formulated, before any action or interpretation an take place. Time merely makes eternal nonsense of the
offer of fixed structure as solution - fixed structure, that is, as opposed to process (in this case, the
patterned creative communicative process of generating adaptive structure).
Conflict, on the individual and social planes, constitutes dispute about the comparative value of
experiences, objects and behaviors. Non-declarative presumption "a," upon which behavior "a" is
(hypothetically) predicated, becomes subjugated to presumption "b," "b" to "c," and so on - in accordance
with some implicit scheme or notion of ultimate value - which firsts manifests itself in behavior, and in
behavioral conflict, long before it can be represented episodically or semantically. It might be said that the
emergence of a scheme of ultimate value is an inevitable consequence of the social and exploratory
evolution of man. Cultural structure, incarnated intrapsychically, originates in creative action, imitation of
such action, integration of action and imitated action - constitutes adaptive action and representation of
integrated pattern of action. Procedures may be mapped in episodic memory, and abstracted in essence by
the semantic system. This process results in construction of a story, or narrative. Any narrative contains,
implicit in it, a set of moral assumptions. Representation of this (primarily social) moral code in form of
episodic memory constitutes the basis for myth; provides the ground and material for eventual
linguistically-mediated development of religious dogma or codified morality. Advantages of such
codification are the advantages granted by abstraction per se - ease of communication, facilitation of
transformation - and formal declaration of (historically-sanctified) principles useful in mediation of
emergent value-centerd dispute. Disadvantages - more subtle, and more easily unrecognized - include
premature closure of creative endeavor, and dogmatic reliance on wisdom of the (dead) past.
Human beings, as social animals, act "as if" motivated by a (limited) system of more-or-less internally
consistent and integrated set of moral virtues - even in the absence of the explicit (declarative)
representation of this system. The nature of these virtues, embodied in behavior, in their origin, have
become more and more conscious (more represented in declarative thinking and remembering) over the
course of socially-mediated human cognitive evolution. Nonetheless - even at the present - it is very
difficult to determine and explicitly state just what virtuous behavior consists of; to describe, with accuracy,
how it is that people should (and do) act - to identify those ends towards which behavior should be
devoted, and to provide explicit and rigorous justification for such claims. A culture is, to a large degree, a
184 





shared moral code, and deviations from that code are generally easily identified, at least post-hoc. It is still
the case, however, that description of the domain of morality tends to exceed the capability of declarative
thought, and that the nature of much of what we think of as moral behavior is still, therefore, embedded in
unconscious procedure. As a consequence, it is easy for us to become confused about the nature of
morality, and to draw inappropriate, untimely and dangerous "fixed" conclusions.
The conservative worships his culture, appropriately, as the creation of that which deserves primary
allegiance, remembrance and respect. This creation is the concrete solution to the problem of adaptation:
"how to behave?" (and how can that be represented and communicated?). It is very easy, in consequence,
to err in attribution of value, and to worship the specific solution itself, rather than the source of that
solution. Hence the biblical injunction:
Thou shalt have no other gods before me.
Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or
that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:

Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God,
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me.... (Exodus 20:3-5).
This "arbitrary" injunction exists in large part because much less explicit attention is generally paid (can
be paid, in the initial stages of abstract representation) to the more fundamental, but more abstract and
difficult, meta-problem of adaptation - "how is (or was) how to behave determined?" - or "what is the
nature of the behavioral procedure that leads to the establishment of and rank-ordering of valid forms of
how to behave? (that leads to succesful adaptation, as such?)" - (and how can that be represented and
communicated?). The answer to the question "what constitutes the highest value?" or "what is the highest
good?" is in fact the solution to the meta-problem, not the problem, although solutions to the latter have
been and are at present constantly confused with solutions to the former - to the constant (often mortal)
detriment of those attempting to address the former.
The precise nature of that which constitutes morality still eludes declarative exposition. The moral
structure, encoded in behavior, is too complex to completely consciously formulate. Nevertheless, that
structure remains an integrated system (essentially, a historically-determined personality, and
representation thereof), a product of determined efforts (procedural and declarative) devoted towards
integrated adaptation, and not a merely random or otherwise incomprehensible compilation of rituals and
beliefs. Culture is a structure aimed towards the attainment of certain (affectively-determined) ends, in the
immediate present and over the longer course of time. As such, a given cultural structure necessarily must
meet a number of stringent and severely constrained requirements: (1) it must be self-maintaining (in that it
promotes activities that allow it to retain its central form); (2) it must be sufficiently flexible to allow for
constant adaptation to constantly shifting environmental circumstances; and (3) it must acquire the
allegiance of the individuals who compose it.
The first requirement is so fundamental, even in the short term, that it appears self-evident. A culture
must promote activities that allow for its own maintenance, or it will devour itself. The second requirement
- flexibility - is more difficult to fulfill, particularly in combination with the first (in combination with selfmaintenance).
A culture must promote activity that supports itself, but must simultaneously allow for
enough innovation so that essentially unpredictable alteration in "environmental" circumstance can be met
with appropriate change in behavioral activity. Cultures that attempt to maintain themself through
promotion of absolute adherence to traditional principles tend rapidly to fail the second requirement, and to
collapse precipitously. Cultures that allow for unrestricted change, by contrast, tend to fail the first, and
collapse equally rapidly. The third requirement (allegiance of the populace) might be considered a
prerequisite for the first two. A culture that lasts must be supported (voluntarily) by those who compose it.
This means, in the final analysis, that its mode of operation must remain verified by the sum total of
individual affect; means that those who constitute the group must remain satisfied by its operation - must
derive sufficient reward, protection from punishment, provision of hope, and alleviation of threat to render
the demands of group maintenance bearable. Furthermore, the group solution must appear ideal - in
comparison to any or all actual or imaginable alternatives. The compelling attractiveness of simplistic
185 









utopian ideologies, even in the "skeptical" twentieth century, is evidence for the stringent difficulty of this
final requirement.
In sub-optimal circumstances, the problem of "protection for the developing individual" and
"maintenance of the protective, uniform social structure" is solved by the permanent sacrifice of individual
diversity to the stability and identity of the group. This solution banishes fear effectively, in the short term,
but also eliminates necessary potential and the capacity for "adaptive" transformation. The suboptimal
solution to the problem of authoritarian or totalitarian danger, in turn, is denigration of the role of society,
attribution of evil to its effects, and degeneration of traditional skill and learning. This is sacrifice of the
Terrible Father, without recognition of the need for his resuscitation - and is, therefore, an invitation to the
intrusion of chaos. The optimal solution to the problem of the necessity for group identification is, by
contrast, to be found in the philosophy of the apprenticeship: each individual must voluntarily subjugate
him or herself to a master - a "wise king" - whose goal is not so much maintenance and protection of his
own identity and status as construction of an individual (a "son"), capable of transcending the restrictions
of the group.
The optimal "wise king" to whom subordination might be regarded as necessary must therefore either be
an individual whose "identity" is nested within a hierarchy whose outermost territory is occupied by the
exploratory hero, or a group about which the same might be said. So the ideal "group" or master might be
conceptualized, once again, as Osiris (the traditions of the past) nested within Horus/Re (the process that
originally created those traditions, and which presently updates them). This means that the "meta-problem"
of adaptation - "what is the nature of the behavioral procedure that leads to the establishment of and rankordering
of valid forms of how to behave? (that leads to succesful adaptation, as such?)" - has been
answered by groups who ensure that their traditions, admired and imitated, are nonetheless subordinate to
the final authority of the creative hero. So the "highest good" becomes "imitation (worship) of the process
represented by the hero," who, as the ancient Sumerians stated, restores all "ruined gods, as though they
were his own creation."74
Human morality is exploratory activity (and allowance for such), undertaken in a sufficiently stable
social context, operating within stringent limitations, embodied in action, secondarily represented,
communicated and abstractly elaborated in episodic and semantic memory. Such morality - act and thought
- is non-arbitrary in structure and specifically goal-directed. It is predicated upon conceptualization of the
highest good (which, in its highest form, is stable social organization allowing for manifestation of the
process of creative adaptation), imagined in comparison to the represented present. Such conceptual
activity allows for determination of acceptable behavior, and for constraint placed upon the meaning of
objects (considered, always, in terms of their functional utility as tools, in a sense, for the attainment of a
desired end).
The pathological state takes imitation of the "body of the laws" to an extreme, and attempts to govern
every detail of individual life. This "total imitation" reduces the behavioral flexibility of the state, and
renders society increasingly vulnerable to devastation through environmental transformation (through the
influx of "chaotic change"). Thus the state suffers, for lack of "the water of life," until it is suddenly
flooded, and swept away. The healthy state, by contrast, compels imitation more in the form of voluntary
affiliation (until the establishment of individual competence and discipline). Following the successful
"apprenticeship," the individual is competent to serve as his own master - to serve as an autonomous
incarnation of the hero. This means that the individual's capacity for "cultural imitation" - that is, his
capacity for subservience to traditional order - has been rendered subordinate to his capacity to function as
the process that mediates between order and chaos. Each "properly-socialized" individaul therefore comes
to serve as Horus (the sun-king, the son of the Great Father), after painstakingly acquiring the wisdom of
Osiris.
The adoption of group identity - the apprenticeship of the adolescent - disciplines the individual, and
brings necessary predictability to his or her actions, within the social group. Group identity, however, is a
construct of the past, fashioned to deal with events characteristic of the past. Although it is reasonable to
view such identity as a necessary developmental stage, it is pathological to view it as the end-point of
human development. The present consists in large part of new problems, and reliance on the wisdom of the
dead - no matter how heroic - eventually compromises the integrity of the living. The well-trained
apprentice, however, has the skills of the dead, and the dynamic intelligence of the living. This means that
186 


he can benefit from - even welcome - inevitable contact with anomaly, in its many guises. The highest
level of morality therefore governs behavior in those spaces where tradition does not rule. The exploratory
hero is at home in unexplored territory - is friend of the stranger, welcoming ear for the new idea, and
cautious, disciplined social revolutionary.
187 




CHAPTER 4: THE APPEARANCE OF ANOMALY: CHALLENGE TO THE SHARED MAP

Moral theories necessarily share common features with other theories. One of the most fundamental shared
features of theories, in general, is their reliance on "extra-theoretical" presuppositions. The "extratheoretical"
presuppositions of explicit moral theorems appear to take implicit form in image and, more
fundamentally, in action. Moral behaviors and schemas of valuation arise as a consequence of behavioral
interaction undertaken in the social world: every individual, motivated to regulate his emotions through
action, modifies the behavior of others, operating in the same environment. The consequence of this mutual
modification, operating over time, is the emergence of a stable pattern of behavior, "designed" to match
individual and social needs, simultaneously. Eventually, this behavioral pattern comes to be coded in
image, heralded in narrative, and explicitly represented in words. In the integrated individual - or the
integrated state - action, imagination and explicit verbal thought are isomorphic: explicit and imagemediated
beliefs and actual behaviors form a coherent unit. Verbal theories of morality (explicit rules)
match traditional images of moral behavior, and action undertaken remains in concordance with both. This
integrated morality lends predictability to behavior, constitutes the basis for the stable state, and helps
ensure that emotion remains under control.
The emergence of anomaly constitutes a threat to the integrity of the moral tradition governing behavior
and evaluation. Strange things or situations can pose a challenge to the structure of a given system of
action and related beliefs; can pose such a challenge at comparatively restricted ("normal") or broader
("revolutionary") levels of organization. A prolonged drought, for example, at the social level - or the
occurrence of a serious illness or disability, on the personal - can force the re-construction of behavior
and the re-analysis of the beliefs that accompany, follow, or underlie such behavior. The appearance of a
stranger - or, more commonly, a group of strangers - may produce a similar effect. The stranger acts out
and holds different beliefs, using different implements and concepts. The mere existence of these anomalous
beliefs, actions and tools - generally the consequence of prolonged, complex and powerful evolutionary
processes - may be sufficient to totally transform or even destroy the culture which encounters them,
unprepared. Cultures may be upset internally, as well, as a consequence of the "strange idea" - or,
similarly, by the actions of the revolutionary.
The capacity to abstract - that is, to code morality in image and word - has facilitated the
communication, comprehension and development of behavior and behavioral interaction. However, the
capacity to abstract has also undermined the stability of moral tradition. Once a procedure has been
encapsulated in image - and, particularly, in word - it becomes easier to modify, "experimentally"; but
also easier to casually criticize and discard. This capacity for easy modification is very dangerous, in that
the explicit and statable moral rules that characterize a given culture tend to exist for reasons that are still
implicit and fundamental. The capacity to abstract - which has facilitated the communication of very
complex and only partially understood ideas - is therefore also the capacity to undermine the very
structure that lends predictability to action, and which constrains the a priori meaning of things and
situations. Our capacity for abstraction is capable of disrupting our "unconscious" - that is, imagistic and
procedural - social identity, upsetting our emotional stability, and undermining our integrity (that is, the
isomorphism between our actions, imaginings, and explicit moral theories or codes). Such disruption
leaves us vulnerable to possession by simplistic ideologies, and susceptible to cynicism, existential despair,
and weakness in the face of threat.
The ever-expanding human capacity for abstraction - central to human "consciousness" - has enabled
us to produce self-models sufficiently complex and extended to take into account the temporal boundaries
of individual life. Myths of the "knowledge of good and evil" and the "fall from paradise" represent
emergence of this representational capacity, in the guise of a "historical event." The consequence of this
"event" - that is, the development of "self-consciousness" - is capacity to represent death, and to
understand that the possibility of death is "part" of the unknown. This "contamination of anomaly with the
possibility of death" has dramatically heightened the emotional power and motivational significance of the
unknown, and led to the production of complex systems of action and belief designed to take that terrible
possibility into account.
188 





These complex systems of action and belief are religious. They comprise the traditional means of
dealing with the shadow cast on life by knowledge of mortality. Our inability to understand our religious
traditions - and our consequent conscious denigration of their perspectives - dramatically and
unfortunately decrease the utility of what they have to offer.
We are conscious enough to destabilize our beliefs, and our traditional patterns of action, but not
conscious enough to understand them. If the reasons for the existence of our traditions were rendered more
explicit, however, perhaps we could develop greater intrapsychic and social integrity. The capacity to
develop such understanding might help us use our capacity for reason to support, rather than destroy, the
moral systems that discipline and protect us.
4.1. Introduction: The Paradigmatic Structure of the Known
The "known" is a hierarchical structure, composed of "walls within walls." The individual sits at the
middle of a series of concentric rings, composed of the integrated "personalities" of his ancestors, nested
(at least in the ideal) within the figure of the exploratory hero. The inner walls are dependent for their
protection - for their continued existence and validity - on the integrity of the outer walls. The farther
"out" a given wall, the more "implicit" its structure - that is, the more it is incarnated in behavior and
image, rather than explicit in word. Furthermore, the farther "out" the wall, the older the "personality,"
the broader range of its applicability, and the greater the magnitude of emotion it holds in check. Groups -
and individuals - may share some levels of the known, but not others. The similarities account for "shared
group identity," insofar as that exists; the differences, for the identification of the other with the forces of
chaos.
Rituals designed to strengthen group identity hold chaos at bay, but threaten individual identification
with the exploratory hero - an identity upon which maintenance of the group ultimately depends. For the
sake of the group, therefore, the individual must not be rendered subservient to the group.
"The aspects of things that are most important for us are hidden because of their simplicity and familiarity.
(One is unable to notice something - because it is always before one's eyes.) The real foundations of his
enquiry do not strike a man at all. Unless that fact has at some time struck him. - And this means: we fail to
be struck by what, once seen, is most striking and powerful."75
A moral system - a system of culture - necessarily shares features in common with other systems. The
most fundamental of the shared features of systems was identified by Kurt Godel. Godel's Incompleteness
Theorem demonstrated that any internally consistent and logical system of propositions must necessarily be
predicated upon assumptions that cannot be proved from within the confines of that system. The
philosopher of science, Thomas Kuhn - specifically discussing the progress of science - described similar
implicit-presumption-ridden systems as paradigmatic. Explicitly scientific paradigmatic systems - the
focus of Kuhn's attention - are concerned with the prediction and control of events whose existence can be
verified, in a particular formal manner, and offer "model problems and solutions to a community of
practitioners."76 Pre-experimental thinking - which primarily means moral thinking [ thinking about the
meaning or significance of events (objects and behaviors)] - also appears necessarily characterized by
paradigmatic structure.
A paradigm is a complex cognitive tool, whose use presupposes acceptance of a limited number of
axioms (or definitions of what constitutes reality, for the purposes of argument and action), whose
interactions produce an internally consistent explanatory and predictive structure. Paradigmatic thinking
might be described as thinking whose domain has been formally limited; thinking that acts "as if" some
questions have been answered in a final manner. The "limitations of the domain" or the "answers to the
questions" make up the axiomatic statements of the paradigm, which are, according to Kuhn, "explicitly"
formulated - semantically represented, according to the argument set forth here - or left "implicit" -
embedded in (episodic) fantasy or embodied behavior. The validity of the axioms must either be accepted
189 







on faith, or (at least) demonstrated using an approach which is external to the paradigm in question (which
amounts to the same thing as faith, from a "within-the-paradigm" perspective).
In some regards, a paradigm is like a game. Play is optional, but, once undertaken, must be governed by
(socially-verified) rules. These rules cannot be questioned, while the game is on (or, if they are, that is a
different game. Children arguing about how to play football are not playing football. They are engaging,
instead, in a form of philosophy). Paradigmatic thinking allows for comprehension of an infinity of "facts,"
through application of a finite system of presuppositions - allows, in the final analysis, for the limited
subject to formulate sufficient provisional understanding of the unlimited experiential object (including the
subject).
Human culture has, by necessity, a paradigmatic structure - devoted not towards objective description of
what is, but to description of the cumulative affective relevance, or meaning, of what is. The capacity to
determine the motivational relevance of an object or situation is dependent, in turn, upon representation of
a (hypothetically) ideal state (conceived in constrast to conceptualization of the present), and upon
generation of an action sequence designed to attain that ideal. It is (stated, unstated, and unstatable) articles
of faith that underly this tripartite representation, and that keep the entire process in operation. These
"articles of faith" are axioms of morality, so to speak - some explicit (represented declaratively, in image
and word), most still implicit - which evolved in the course of human exploration and social organization,
over the course of hundreds of thousands of years. In their purely implicit states, such axioms are extremely
resistant to alteration. Once made (partially) explicit, however, moral axioms rapidly become subject to
endless careful and thoughtful or casual careless debate. Such debate is useful, for continuance and
extension of adaptation, but also very dangerous, as it is the continued existence of unchallenged moral
axioms that keeps the otherwise unbearable significance of events constrained, and the possibility for
untrammeled action alive.
A paradigmatic structure provides for determinate organization of (unlimited) information, according to
limited principles. The system of Euclidean geometry provides a classic example. The individual who
wishes to generate a desired outcome of behavior, as a consequence of the application of Euclidean
principles, is bound by necessity to accept certain axioms "on faith." These axioms follow:
". A straight line segment can be drawn joining any two points.
2. Any straight line segment can be extended indefinitely in a straight line.
3. Given any straight line segment, a circle can be drawn having the segment as radius and one end point
as center.
4. All right angles are congruent.
5. If 2 lines are drawn which intersect a 3rd in such a way that the sum of the inner angles on one side is
less than two right angles, then the 2 lines inevitably must intersect each other on that side if extended
far enough."77
It is the interaction of each of the five initial postulates - which are all that necessarily have to be
remembered, or understood, for geometry to prove useful - that gives rise to the internally consistent and
logical Euclidean structure we are all familiar with. What constitutes truth, from within the perspective of
this structure, can be established by reference to these initial postulates. However, the postulates themselves
must be accepted. Their validity cannot be demonstrated, within the confines of the system. They might be
"provable" from within the confines of another system, however - although the integrity of that system will
still remain dependent, by necessity, on different postulates, down to an indeterminate end. The validity of
a given structure appears necessarily predicated on "unconscious" presuppositions - the presupposition that
space has three dimensions, in the case of Euclidean geometry (a presupposition which is clearly
questionable).
It appears, in many cases, that the assumptions of explicit semantic statements take episodic or imagistic
form. The Euclidean postulates, for example, appear based upon "observable facts" (images of "the world
of experience" as interpreted). Euclid grounded his explicit abstract (semantic) system in observable
"absolutes." It can be concretely demonstrated, for example, that any two points drawn in the sand can be
joined by a given line. Repeated illustration of this "fact" appears (acceptably) convincing - as does,
similarly, ("empirical") demonstration that any straight line segment can be extended indefinitely in a
190 





straight line. These postulates (and the remaining three) cannot be proved from within the confines of
geometry itself, but they appear true, and will be accepted as such, as a consequence of practical example.
What this means is that belief in Euclidean presumptions is dependent upon acceptance of practical
experience as sufficient certainty. The Euclidean draws a line in the sand, so to speak, and says "the
questions stop here."
Similarly, it appears that what constitutes truth from the episodic perspective is predicated upon
acceptance of the validity and sufficiency of specific procedural operations. How a thing is represented in
episodic memory, for example - which is what a thing is, insofar as we know what it is - appears
dependent upon how it was investigated; appears dependent on the implicit "presuppositions" driving or
limiting the behavioral strategies applied to it in the course of creative exploration. Kuhn states:
"Scientists can agree that a Newton, Lavoisier, Maxwell or Einstein has produced an apparently
permanent solution to a group of outstanding problems and still disagree, sometimes without being
aware of it, about the particular abstract characteristics that make those solutions permanent. They can,
that is, agree in their identification of a paradigm without agreeing on, or even attempting to produce, a
full interpretation or rationalization of it. Lack of a standard interpretation or of an agreed reduction to
rules will not prevent a paradigm from guiding research. Normal science can be determined in part by
the direct inspection of paradigms, a process that is often aided by but does not depend upon the
formulation of rules and assumptions. Indeed, the existence of a paradigm need not even imply that any
full set of rules exists."
He continues, in a footnote:
"Michael Polyani378 has brilliantly developed a very similar theme, arguing that much of the scientist's
success depends upon "tacit knowledge," i.e., upon knowledge that is acquired through practice and that
cannot be articulated explicitly." 379
The Euclidean draws a line connecting two points in the sand, and accepts on faith the sufficiency of that
behavioral demonstration and the evident certainty of its outcome (in part, because no alternative
conceptualization can presently be imagined). Euclidean geometry worked - and was considered complete
- for centuries, because it allowed for the prediction and control of all those experienceable phenomena that
arose as a consequence of human activity, limited in its domain by past behavioral capacity. Two hundred
years ago, we did not know how to act concretely, or think abstractly, in a manner that would produce some
situation whose nature could not be described by Euclid. That is no longer the case. Many alternative, and
more inclusive geometries have been generated during the course of the last century. These new systems
describe the nature of "reality" - the phenomena that emerge as a consequence of ongoing behavior - more
completely.
All representations of objects (or situations, or behavioral sequences) are of course conditional, because
they may be altered unpredictably, or even transformed, entirely, as a consequence of further exploration
(or because of some spontaneous anomaly-emergence). The (anxiety-inhibiting, goal-specifying) model of
the object of experience is therefore inevitably contingent - dependent, for its validity, on the maintenance
of those (invisible) conditions which applied and those (unidentified) contexts which were relevant when
the information was originally generated. Knowledge is mutable, in consequence - as Nietzsche observed:
"There are still harmless self-observers who believe that there are 'immediate certainties'; for example,
'I think,' or as the superstition of Schopenhauer put it, 'I will'; as though knowledge here got hold of its
object purely and nakedly as 'the thing in itself,' without any falsification on the part of either the
subject or the object. But that 'immediate certainty,' as well as 'absolute knowledge' and 'the thing in
itself,' involve a contradictio in adjecto, I shall repeat a hundred times; we really ought to free ourselves
from the seduction of words!
Let the people suppose that knowledge means knowing things entirely; the philosopher must say to
himself: When I analyze the process that is expressed in the sentence, 'I think,' I find a whole series of
daring assertions that would be difficult, perhaps impossible, to prove; for example, that it is I who
think, that there must necessarily be something that thinks, that thinking is an activity and operation on
191 




the part of a being who is thought of as a cause, that there is an 'ego,' and, finally, that it is already
determined what is to be designated by thinking - that I know what thinking is. For if I had not already
decided within myself what it is, by what standard could I determine whether that which is just
happening is not perhaps 'willing' or 'feeling'? In short, the assertion 'I think' assumes that I compare
my state at the present moment with other states of myself which I know, in order to determine what it
is; on account of this retrospective connection with further 'knowledge,' it has, at any rate, no immediate
certainty for me.
In place of the 'immediate certainty' in which the people may believe in the case at hand, the
philosopher thus finds a series of metaphysical questions presented to him, truly searching questions of
the intellect; to wit: 'From where do I get the concept of thinking? Why do I believe in cause and effect?
What gives me the right to speak of an ego, and even of an ego as a cause, and finally of an ego as the
cause of thought?' Whoever ventures to answer these metaphysical questions at once by an appeal to a
sort of intuitive perception, like the person who says, 'I think, and know that this, at least, is true, actual,
and certain' - will encounter a smile and two question marks from a philosopher nowadays. 'Sir,' the
philosopher will perhaps give him to understand, 'it is improbable that you are not mistaken; but why
insist on the truth?'" 380
The "object" always remains something capable of transcending the "bounds" of its representation; is
something that inevitably retains its mysterious essence, its connection with the unknown, and its potential
for the inspiration of hope and fear. The "actual" or "transcendent" object, in and of itself - insofar as such
a thing can be considered - is the sum total of its explored properties, plus that which remains unexplored -
the unknown itself.
Our understanding of a given phenomena is always limited by the resources, temporal, economic and
technological, that we have at our disposal. Knowledge is necessarily contingent, although it is neither less
"objective," necessarily, nor less "knowledge," because of that. Our representations of objects (or
situations, or behavioral sequences) are currently accepted as valid, because they serve their purposes as
tools. If we can manipulate our models in imagination, apply the solutions so generated to the "real" world,
and produce the outcome desired, we presume that our understanding is valid - and sufficient. It isn't until
we do something, and produce an unexpected outcome, that our models are deemed insufficient. This
means that our current representations of a given phenomena are predicated on the (implicit) presumption
that sufficient exploration of that phenomena has taken place. "Sufficient exploration" is a judgment
rendered - as implied previously - as a consequence of a sequence of action attaining its desired end
("what works" is "true"). A procedure is deemed sufficient when it attains its desired end - when it meets
its goal. The nature of that goal, archetypally, is establishment of or movement towards a paradisal state -
characterized by stable, dynamic relief from (unbearable) suffering, freedom from (paralyzing) anxiety,
abundance of hope, and bountiful provision of primary reward - the peaceful land of "milk and honey," in
mythical language. This is merely to say that knowledge serves the ends of life, rather than existing in and
of itself.
Some contingent forms of knowledge - behaviors, say, and schemas of value - prove of lasting worth
(which is to say, produce the desired outcome across a broad range of contexts). These are "remembered" -
stored in ritual and myth - and transmitted down the generations. Over the course of time, they become
integrated with all other extant behaviors and schemas of value, in a hierarchy that allows for their various
expression. This hierarchy, as described previously, is composed of the actions and valuations of past
heroes, organized by other heroes into a stable social character, shared by all members of the same culture
(as the Christian church constitutes the symbolic body of Christ). This hierarchy has been and currently is
shaped by endless loops of affective feedback, as the means and goals chosen by each individual and the
society at large are modified by the actions and reactions of society and the eternally ineradicable presence
of the unknown itself. The resultant "hiearchy of motivation" can be most accurately characterized as a
personality - as the mythic "ancestral" figure that everyone imitates, consciously (with full participation of
the semantic and eposidic system, rational thought and imagination) or unconsciously (in action only,
despite express "disbelief"). The hierarchically structured behavioral pattern (personality) that constitutes
culture comes, with the passage of time, to be represented secondarily, isormorphically, in episodic
192 




memory, and then coded explicitly - insofar as current cognitive development makes that possible. The
explicit moral code is therefore predicated upon presumptions which are valid purely from the episodic
perspective; in turn, these episodic representations derive their validity from procedural knowledge,
designed to meet affective requirements, in the social community and in the presence of the unknown.
A moral philosophy, which is a pattern for behavior and interpretation, is therefore dependent for its
existence upon a mythology, which is a collection of images of behaviors, which emerge, in turn, as a
consequence of social interaction (cooperation and competition), designed to meet emotional demands.
These demands take on what is essentially a universally constant and limited form, as a consequence of
their innate psychobiological basis and the social expression of that basis. Hence (as implied previously)
the limited "forms" of myth. Northrop Frye states, in this regard:
"I should distinguish primary and secondary concern, even though there is no real boundary line
between them. Secondary concerns arise from the social contract, and include patriotic and other
attachments of loyalty, religious beliefs, and class-conditioned attitudes and behaviors. They develop
from the ideological aspect of myth, and consequently tend to be directely expressed in ideological
prose language. In the mythical stage, they often accompany a ritual. Such a ritual may be designed, for
example, to impress on a boy that he is to be admitted to the society of men in a ritual for men only; that
he belongs to this tribe or group and not that one, a fact which will probably determine the nature of his
marriage; that these and not those are his special totems or tutelary deities.
Primary concerns may be considered in four main areas: food and drink, along with related bodily
needs; sex; property (i.e. money, possessions, shelter, clothing and everything that constitutes property
in the sense of what is "proper" to one's own life); liberty of movement. The general object of primary
concern is expressed in the Biblical phrase 'life more abundantly.' In origin, primary concerns are not
individual or social in reference so much as generic, anterior to the conflicting claims of the singular and
the plural. But as society developes they become the claims of the individual body as distinct from those
of the body politic. A famine is a social problem, but only the individual starves. So a sustained attempt
to express primary concerns can develop only in societies where the sense of individuality has also
developed. The axioms of primary concerns are the simplest and baldest platitudes it is possible to
formulate: that life is better than death, happiness better than misery; health better than sickness,
freedom better than bondage, for all people without significant exception.
What we have been calling ideologies are closely linked to secondary concerns, and in large measure
consist of rationalizations of them. And the longer we look at myths, or storytelling patterns, the more
clearly their links with primary concern stand out.... This rooting of poetic myth in primary concern
accounts for the fact that mythical themes, as distinct from individual myths or stories, are limited in
number."81
The (explicit) moral code is validated by reference to the (religious, mythic) narrative; the narrative is
(primarily episodic) representation of behavioral tradition; the tradition emerges as a consequence of
individual adaptation to the demands of natural conditions, manifest (universally) in emotion, generated in
a social context. The episodic representation - which is representation of the outcome of a procedure and
the procedure itself - is predicated upon belief in the sufficiency and validity of that procedure; more
subtly, it has the same structure - at least insofar as it is an accurate representation of behavior - and
therefore contains the (implicit) hierarchical structure of historically-determined procedural knowledge in
more explicit form.
Over lengthy historical periods, therefore, the "image" ever-more-accurately encapsulates the behavior -
and stories find their compelling essential form. Frye states:
"The Bible's literary unity is a by-product of something else - we might call it an unconscious byproduct
if we knew anything at all about the mental processes involved. The earlier part of the Old
Testament, with its references to the Book of Jasher and the like, gives the effect of having distilled and
fermented a rich poetic literature to extract a different kind of verbal essence, and on a smaller scale the
same process can be seen in the New Testament.... The editorial work done on this earlier poetic
material was not an attempt to reduce it from poetry to a kind of plain prose sense, assuming that there is

such a thing. This kind of sense implies a direct appeal to credulity, to the infantilism which is so
exasperating a feature of popular religious and other ideologies. What we have is rather an absorption of
a poetic and mythic presentation that takes us past myth to something else. In doing so it will elude
those who assume that myth means only something that did not happen."82
The second-order semantic codification is grounded in the episodic representation; tends, over time, to
duplicate the hierarchical structure of that representation; and is predicated upon acceptance of the validity
of the procedural and episodic memories. Semantic, episodic and procedural contents therefore share (in
the intrapsychically integrated, "conscious," or psychologically healthy individual) identical hierarchical
structure, in their respective forms of action or representation. This integrated morality lends predictability
to individual and interpersonal behavior, constitutes the basis for the stable state, and helps ensure that
emotion remains controlled and regulated.

Figure 47: The Paradigmatic Structure of the Known
Figure 47: The Paradigmatic Structure of the Known presents the "personality" of a typical western
individual - in this case, a middle-class businessman and father. His individual life is nested within an
increasingly transpersonal, shared "personality," with deep, increasingly implicit historical roots. The
"smaller stories," nested within the larger, are dependent for their continued utility on maintenance of the
larger - as the middle-class family, for example, is dependent for its economic stability on the capitalist
system, as the capitalist system is nested in humanistic western thought, as humanism is dependent on the
notion of the inherent value of the individual (on the notion of "individual rights") - and as the inherent

value of the individual is dependent on his association, or ritual identification, with the exploratory
communicative hero. The more-encompassing, "outer" levels of organization may be extant purely in
behavior - that is, the individual in question may have little or no explicit imagistic or semantic knowledge
of his historical roots, although he still "acts out" a historically-conditioned personality. It is certainly
possible, as well - and is increasingly the norm - for an individual to deny explicit "belief" in the validity
of the Judeo-Christian ethic, or the existence of any transpersonal "exploratory hero" whatsoever. This
denial, at the explicit (verbalizable) level of "consciousness" merely interferes with the integrity of the
personality in question. The procedural aspect that largely constitutes Judeo-Christian belief (for example)
- and even ritual identification with the hero, to some degree (the "imitation of Christ") - almost inevitably
remains intact (at least in the case of the "respectable citizen"). The modern educated individual therefore
"acts out," but does not "believe." It might be said that the lack of isomorphism between explicit abstract
self-representation and actions undertaken in reality makes for substantial existential confusion - and for
susceptibility to sudden dominance by any ideology providing a "more complete" explanation. Equally or
even more troublesome is the tendency of lack of explicit "belief" to manifest itself, slowly, in alteration of
imagistic representation and behavior (as ideas change actions, over time), and to "invisibly" undermine
intrapsychic and social stability.

Figure 48: The Known: Nested Groups and Individuals
Groups - and individuals - may differ in their goals, values and behaviors at one level of analysis, while
sharing features in common at "higher," more implicit levels. Figure 48: The Known: Nested Groups and
Individuals portrays three such groups - although this number is arbitrary. Catholic, Protestant and Greek
Orthodox Christians, for example, might all be regarded as enveloped by their participation in the JudeoChristian
"personality"; although they may well fight among themselves, at the drop of a hat ("within" the
195 










confines of that personality), they are liable to eagerly join forces, to eliminate a threat - real or perceived -
from Jews or Muslims. Within each of these three groups - these three shared "personalities" - there are
going to be differences and similarities, as well. Each community of believers is likely to have its separate
sects, separated from one another by a certain historical duration (and the alterations in value structure and
behavior that accompany such divergence). Finally, individuals within groups will diverge, too, according
to their individual interests and idiosyncratic beliefs. (Paradoxically, it is fidelity to these individual
characteristics that most truly unites all person in "worship" of the exploratory hero. This means that the
innermost "level" of personality organization - that aspect which is truly unique, rather than shared - is
also the outer level, upon which the stability of the entire structure depends.)
The emergence of anomaly - the "re-emergence of the Great Mother" - constitutes a threat to the
integrity of the moral tradition governing behavior and evaluation. It is for this reason that adjustment to
anomaly - in the many "mythologically-equivalent" forms it takes - is frequently resisted passively (by
"failure to take it into account") and aggressively (by attempts to eradicate its source). Anomalies may have
their effect at different "levels," as we have seen. The most profound threats undermine the stability of the
"personalities" that encompass the largest number of people, have the deepest historical roots, are most
completely grounded in image and behavior - are most broadly applicable, regardless of situation ("cover"
the largest possible span of time and space). We seem "aware," in some sense, of the danger of profound
anomalies - perhaps because a substantial amount of negative emotion and abstract cognitive consideration
can be elicited merely through positing their possibility ("what if we were threatened by the foreign
devils?"). Our tendency to personally identify with our respective countries, say - to foster and be proud of
our patriotism - reflects "knowledge" that our personal integrity and security is integrally bound up, for
better or worse, with the destiny of our cultures. We are therefore motivated to protect those cultures - to
defend our societies and ourselves against the "return of the terrible Dragon of Chaos." [It is frequently the
case, however, that our attempts to bolster the security of part of our protective identity undermine our
stability at a higher-order of being. The "American (British, Russian, Chinese) Way of Life," for example,
is a more visible (and less personally demanding) figure than the exploratory hero - although it is also a
less critically important part of our core cultural and personal identities. This means that attempts to
increase the strength of the state at the cost of the individual are counter-productive, even though they may
serve to heighten the sense of order and regulate emotion in the short term. Patriotism - or any similar
attempt at the strengthening of group identity - must necessarily be bounded, in consequence, by
knowledge that the creative capacity of the individual must be regarded as supremely important -
"divine."]
The individual is protected from chaos in its full manifestation by the many "walls" that surround him.
All the space outside a given wall, however - despite its probable encapsulation by additional protective
structures - appears relatively dangerous to anyone currently within that wall. All "outside territory"
evokes fear. This "equivalence" does not mean, however, that all threats are equivalently potent - just that
anything "outside" shares the capacity to frighten (or enlighten) anything "inside." Challenges posed to the
"highest" levels of order are clearly the most profound, and are likely to engender the most thorough
reactions. Observation of response to such threats may be complicated, however, by the problem of time
frame: challenge posed to extremely "implicit" personalities may evoke reactions that extend over
centuries, in the form of abstract exploration and argumentation, revision of action, and war between
opposing alternative viewpoints (as in the case, for example, of the Catholic and Protestant Christians). The
fact that threats posed to the "highest" levels of order are the most profound is complicated, to say it
another way, by the "implicitness" of those levels, and their "invisibility." Furthermore, the structures
nested within a given personality may have enough intrinsic strength to stand for a long while after the
outer walls that protected them - and which truly provided them with structural integrity - have been
breached and destroyed. The stability of a political or social structure once nested in a damaged religious
preconception might be likened to a building standing after an earthquake: superficially, it looks intact -
but one more minor shake may be sufficient to bring it crashing down. The "death of god" in the modern
world looks like an accomplished fact - and, perhaps an event whose repercussions have not proved fatal.
But the existential upheaval and philosophical uncertainty characteristic of the first three-quarters of the
twentieth century demonstrate that we have not yet settled back on firm ground. Our current miraculous
196 






state of relative peace and economic tranquility should not blind us to the fact that we have gaping holes in
our spirits.
The chaos "hidden" or given form by the establishment of temporal order may remanifest itself at any
time. It may do so in a number of guises, of apparent diversity. Any re-emergence of chaos, however -
despite the reason - may be regarded as the same sort of event, from the perspective of emotion,
motivational significance or meaning. This is to say that all things that threatens the status quo, regardless
of their "objective" features, tends to be placed into the same "natural category," as a consequence of their
affective identity. The barbarian at the gates is therefore indistinguishable from the heretic within; both are
equivalent to the natural disaster, to the disappearance of the hero, and to the emergent senility of the king.
The "re-emergence of the Dragon of Chaos" - whatever his form - constitutes the unleashing of dangerous,
fear-producing (and promising) potential. The different "guises" of this potential, and the reasons for and
nature of their equivalence, constitute our next topic of discussion. The nature of the response evoked by
that potential - heroic and otherwise - comprise subject matter, after that discussion, for the remainder of
the book.
4.2. Particular Forms of Anomaly: The Strange, the Stranger, the Strange Idea, and
the Revolutionary Hero
Anomalous events share capacity to threaten the integrity of the known - share ability to disrupt the
"familiar and explored." Such events, while differing in their specific details and manner of manifestation,
tend to occupy the same natural category. Threats to the stability of cultural tradition emerge in four
"mythologically inseparable" manners: through rapid natural environmental shift, "independent" of
human activity; through contact with a heretofore isolated foreign culture; through application of novel
(revolutionary) linguistically or episodically-mediated critical skill - the inevitable consequence of
increasing ability to abstract, learn, and communicate; and as a consequence of revolutionary heroic
activity.
The "natural" human tendency to respond to the stranger, the strange idea, and the creative individual
with fear and aggression can be more easily comprhended, once it is understood that these diverse
phenomena share categorical identity with the "natural disaster." The problem with this "natural"
response pattern, however, is that the upsetting capacity of the anomalous is simultaneously the vital
source of interest, meaning and individual strength. Furthermore, the ability to upset ourselves -to
undermine and revitalize our own beliefs - is an intrinsic, necessary and "divine" aspect of the human
psyche: is part of the seminal "Word" itself.
The Word - in its guise as painstakingly abstracted action and object - can create new worlds and
destroy old; can pose an unbearable threat to seemingly stable cultures, and can redeem those that have
become senescent, inflexible and paralytic.
To those who have "sold their souls" to the group, however, the Word is indistinguishable from the
enemy.
4.2.1. The Strange
Transformation of "environmental" circumstances, as the consequence of purely natural causes, constitutes
the single most immediately evident cause for the deterioration of cultural stability. Prolonged drought,
floods, earthquakes, plagues - nature's most horrifying and arbitrary occurrences - are capable of rendering
the most carefully adapted societies impotent at a single blow.
Natural disasters of this sort might merely be considered rapid transformation - situations where
previously noted affectively relevant environmental relationships alter, faster than adaptive movement
keeps pace. This means that the insufficiency of cultural adaptation cannot easily be distinguished from
natural catastrophe. A society light on its feet, so to speak, is constantly in a position to adapt to the
unexpected - even to the rapid and catastrophic unexpected - even to transform such change into
something positively beneficial (consider, for the example, the post-war Japanese). The relationship
197 

"natural disaster/cultural adaptation therefore constitutes the social analogue to that obtaining between
"emotion" and "cognition": affect generated, in large part, as a consequence of novelty, always emerges
where something is not known (and is therefore always dependent on what is known); is always
experienced in relationship to some conceptualization of the present, the future, and the means to get from
one to the other. What constitutes "novelty," then, is dependent on what is not novel, in a particular
circumstance. What constitutes "trauma" depends, likewise, on the behavioral repertoire and value-schema
available for use at the time of a given event or transformation. A blizzard that would incapacitate
Washington for a month barely makes the residents of Montreal blink.
Mythic representations of the rapid mutation of environmental contingency (portrayed as the
reappearance of the Great Mother or, more fundamentally, of the Dragon of Chaos) are in consequence
necessarily "contaminated" with images of the sterile, senescent, or tyrannical king, whose inflexibility
renders all inevitable environmental transformation deadly. When is a disaster not a disaster? When the
community is prepared to respond appropriately. Conversely, any minor change in the natural world might
be regarded as terminal, catastrophic - and actually be so - when the adaptive structure designed to fit that
world has become so authoritarian that any change whatsoever is reflexively deemed forbidden,
heretical.383 A society with this attitude - such as the former Soviet Union - is an accident waiting to
happen. An interesting example of the consequences of such inflexibility, on the personal scale, is offered
by Kuhn:
"In a psychological experiment that deserves to be far better known outside the trade, Bruner and
Postman384 asked experimental subjects to identify on short and controlled exposure a series of playing
cards. Many of the cards were normal, but some were made anomalous, e.g., a red six of spades and a
black four of hearts. Each experimental run was constituted by the display of a single card to a single
subject in a series of gradually increased exposures. After each exposure the subject was asked what he
had seen, and the run was terminated by two successive correct identifications.
Even on the shortest exposures many subjects identified most of the cards, and after a small increase
all the subjects identified them all. For the normal cards these identifications were usually correct, but
the anomalous cards were almost always identified, without apparent hesitation or puzzlement, as
normal. The black four of hearts might, for example, be identified as the four of either spades or hearts.
Without any awareness of trouble, it was immediately fitted to one of the conceptual categories prepared
by prior experience. One would not even like to say that the subjects had seen something different from
what they identified. With a further increase of exposure to the anomalous cards, subjects did begin to
hesitate and to display awareness of anomaly. Exposed, for example, to the red six of spades, some
would say: That's the six of spades, but there's something wrong with it - the black has a red border.
Further increase of exposure resulted in still more hesitation and confusion until finally, and sometimes
quite suddenly, most subjects would produce the correct identification without hesitation. Moreover,
after doing this with two or three of the anomalous cards, they would have little further difficulty with
the others. A few subjects, however, were never able to make the requisite adjustment of their categories.
Even at forty times the average exposure required to recognize normal cards for what they were,
more than 10 per cent of the anomalous cards were not correctly identified. And the subjects who then
failed often experienced acute personal distress. One of them exclaimed: "I can't make the suit out,
whatever it is. It didn't even look like a card that time. I don't know what color it is now or whether it's
a spade or a heart. I'm not even sure now what a spade looks like. My God!"85
Myth and literature constantly represent the "parched kingdom," the society victimized (most
frequently) by drought - which is the absence of water, concretely, and the "water of life" or spirit,
symbolically; represent the land scorched as a consequence of the over-prolonged dominance of the (oncegreat)
ruling "idea." This idea, in the narrative (and frequently, in actuality), is the king, the ancestral spirit,
representative of his people, made tyrannical by age, or pride, unbearable disappointment, or withering
under the influence of some wilfully misunderstood malevolent advising force. The development of such an
unpleasant and dangerous situations calls, of course, for the entrance of the hero - the "lost son" of the true
king, raised in secrecy by alternative parents; the rightful ruler of the kingdom, whose authority was
undermined or who was supposedly killed during vulnerable youth; the proper heir to the throne, who had
198 


been journeying in far-off lands, and was presumed dead. The hero overturns the tyrant, and regains his
proper place; the gods, pleased by the re-establishment of proper order, allow the rain once more to fall (or
stop it from falling in dangerous excess). In a story of this type, the creative aspect of the unknown (nature)
is "locked away," metaphorically, by the totalitarian opinion of the current culture. Such a state of affairs
might be represented, for example, by the sleeping princess, in the kingdom brought to a standstill (or by
some alternative variant of the existence of the "treasure hard to attain"86). Paralyzed by patriarchal
despotism387 (or, frequently, by fear of the Terrible Mother), the kingdom remains stagnant, while the
princess - nature, in her benevolent guise - waits for the kiss of the hero to wake. Her awakened and
revitalized beauty subsequently re-animates her people.
Rituals of the death and renewal of the king act out this transformation of cultural adaptation long before
the concept of rebirth can be rendered abstractly comprehensible. Frye states:
"The hypothetical ritual studied in Frazer's Golden Bough may be vulnerable enough in various
anthropological contexts, but as a mythical structure it is as solid as the pyramids. Here a king regarded
as divine is put to death at the height of his powers, for fear that his physical weakening will bring a
corresponding impotence to the fertility of the land he rules.... When sacrificed, the divine king is
immediately replaced by a successor, and his body is then eaten and his blood drunk in a ritual
ceremony. We have to make a rather violent effort of visualization to see that there are now two bodies
of the divine king, one incarnate in the successor, the other concealed in the bellies of his worshippers.
The latter causes the society to become, through eating and drinking the same person, integrated into a
single body, which is both their own and his."88
The extensive and universal corpus of dying and resurrecting god myths389 (acted in sacrificial ritual)
dramatize two notions. The first is that the actual ideas/patterns of behavior governing adaptation must die
and be reborn to ensure constant update of the techniques of survival. The second, more fundamental, is
that the hero - the active agent of adaptation - must eternally upset the protective structure of tradition and
enter into "sacrificial union" with the re-emergent unknown. Cosmological phenomena themselves "act
out" (are utilized as descriptive tools for, more accurately) this eternal drama: the sun (god), born in the
east, "dies" in the west, and passes into the underworld of night (into the lair of the dragon of chaos).
Nightly, ths sun-hero battles the terrible forces of chaos, cuts himself out of the belly of the beast, and is
reborn triumphant in the morning.
The master of the strange in its "natural form" is the hero in his technological guise (more particularly,
say, than in his role as social revolutionary). Marduk, who faced Tiamat in single combat, is a very focused
representative of man's "mastery" over nature. The pattern of action signified by this god - that is,
courageous and creative approach in the face of uncertainty - was regarded "unconsciously" by the
Mesopotamians as necessary, as stated previously, to the "creation of ingenious things" from the "conflict
with Tiamat."90 The hero fashions defences out of nature to use against nature. This idea - which underlies
man's cultural adaptation - manifests itself "naturally" in the human psyche:
Spontaneous fantasy manifested August 10, 1997, by my daughter, Mikhaila (aged five years, eight
months) while playing "prince and princess" with Julian (her three-year old brother): Dad, if we killed
a dragon, we could use his skin as armor, couldn't we? Wouldn't that be a good idea?
The hero uses the positive aspect of the Great Mother as protection from her negative counterpart. In this
manner, the "natural disaster" is kept at bay, or - better yet - transformed from a crisis into an opportunity.
4.2.2. The Stranger
Arrival of the stranger, concretely presented in mythology, constitutes a threat "to the stability of the
kingdom" metaphorically indistinguishable from that posed by "environmental transformation." The stable
meaning of experiential events, constrained by the hierarchical structure of group identity, is easily
disrupted by the presence of the "other," who practically poses a concrete threat to the stability of the
present dominance structure, and who, more abstractly - as his actions "contain" his moral tradition -
199 







exists as the literal embodiment of challenges to the a priori assumptions guiding belief. The stranger does
not act in the manner expected. His "inherent" unpredictability renders him indistinguishable from the
unknown, as such, and to easy identification with the force constantly working to undermine order. From a
within-group perspective, so to speak, such identification is not purely arbitrary, either, as the mere
existence of the (successful) stranger poses serious threat to the stability of the general culture - to its
ability to inhibit existential terror and provide determinate meaning to action.
When the members of one isolated group come into contact with the members of another, the stage is
therefore set for trouble. Each culture, each group, evolved to protect its individual members from the
unknown - from the abysmal forces of the Great and Terrible Mother, from unbearable affect itself -
evolved to structure social relationships and render them predictable, to provide a goal and the means to
attain it. All cultures provide their constituent individuals with particular modes of being in the face of
terror and uncertainty. All cultures are stable, integrated, hierarchically arranged structures predicated upon
assumptions held as absolute - but the particular natures of these assumptions differ (at least at the more
comprehensible and "conscious" levels of analyses). Every culture represents an idiosyncratic paradigm, a
pattern of behaving in the face of the unknown, and the paradigm cannot be shifted (its basic axioms cannot
be modified), without dramatic consequences - without dissolution, metaphoric death - prior to (potential)
reconstruction.
Every society - every culture - provides protection from the unknown. The unknown itself is a
dangerous thing, full of unpredictability and threat. Chaotic social relationships (destructured dominance
hierarchies) create severe anxiety and dramatically heighten the potential for interpersonal conflict.
Furthermore, the dissolution of culturally-determined goals renders individual life, identified with those
goals, meaningless and unrewarding in instrinsic essence. It is neither reasonable nor possible to simply
abandon a particular culture, which is a pattern of general adaptation, just because someone else comes
along, who does things a different way, whose actions are predicated on different assumptions. It is no
simple matter to rebuild social relationships in the wake of the introduction of new ideas. It is no
straightforward process, furthermore, to give up a goal, a central unifying and motivating idea.
Identification of an individual with a group means that individual psychological stability is staked on
maintenance of group welfare. If the group founders suddenly, as a consequence of external circumstance
or internal strife, the individual is laid bare to the world, his social context disappears, his reason for being
vanishes, he is swallowed up by the unbearable unknown, and he cannot easily survive. Nietzsche states:
"In an age of disintegration that mixes races indiscriminately, human beings have in their bodies the
heritage of multiple origins, that is, opposite, and often not merely opposite, drives and value standards
that fight each other and rarely permit each other any rest. Such human beings of late cultures and
refracted lights will on the average be weaker human beings: their most profound desire is that the war
they are should come to an end."91
Of course, the unstated conclusion to Nietzsche's observation is that the war typifying the person of
"mixed-race" (mixed-culture, in more modern terminology) is the affectively-unpleasant precursor to the
more thoroughly integrated individual, who has "won" the war. This "victor" - who has organized the
currently warring diverse cultural standpoints into a hierarchy, integrated once more - will be stronger than
his "uni-cultural" predecessor, as his behavior and values will be the consequence of the more diverse and
broader ranging union of heretofore separate cultures. It is reasonable to presuppose that it was the
"unconscious" consideration of the potentially positive outcome of such mixing that led Nietzsche to the
revelation of the dawning future "superman."92 It is not the mere existence of various previously-separated
presuppositions in a single psyche that constitutes the post-contact victory, however. This means that the
simplistic promotion of "cultural diversity" as panacea is likely to produce anomie, nihilism and
conservative backlash. It is the moulding of these diverse beliefs into a single hierarchy, that is
precondition for the peaceful admixture of all. This moulding can only be accomplished by war conducted
between paradoxical elements, within the "post-contact" individual psyche. Such a war is so difficult - so
emotionally upsetting and cognitively challenging - that the murder of the anomalous "other" in the
morally-acceptable guise of war frequently seems a comforting alternative.
200 










Fundamental threats can be posed very easily, between groups of people. Most concretely, foreign
behaviors are threatening, unpredictable in particular, terrifying in general - because essential beliefs,
challenging beliefs, are most convincingly expressed through actions:
He became to us a reproof of our thoughts;
the very sight of him is a burden to us, because his manner of life is unlike that of others, and his ways
are strange. (Wisdom 2:14-15 RSV)
A foreign man, a stranger, is threatening because he is not firmly fixed within a social hierarchy, and may
therefore behave unpredictably - with unpredictable consequences for the social hierarchy. Signals of
safety and threat vary, or may vary, between members of different groups. Unpredictable means potentially
dangerous. More abstractly, what the stranger believes, specifically, threatens the integrated structure of
historically-determined belief, in general. This does not present a problem, when his foreign actions or
ideas do not produce fundamental conflict - do not threaten key beliefs. When basic concepts are
threatened, however, the unbearable, terrible unknown once again rises up, and once firm ground begins to
give way.
4.2.3. The Strange Idea
Increasing ability to abstract makes previous learning, established through non-abstract means, increasingly
modifiable - and increasingly vulnerable. In a way, this is the whole point of abstraction, and the very
capacity to learn. Words - deceptively simple and harmless - are sufficient to create disruption and
conflict, because Homo sapiens can verbalize his beliefs. It could be said, therefore - with sufficient
rationale - that a new idea is an abstract stranger (or, by the same logic, a natural disaster). It is for this
reason that the pen is truly mightier than the sword.
The process of increased abstraction allows for increasing self-understanding (self-consciousness) - at
least in potential - and for the prediction of the behaviors of others [which is a capacity integrally linked to
the development of self-consciousness (how would I behave in a situation like that?)]. In addition,
abstraction facilitates communication of morality (instruction in how to behave), by making it unnecessary
to wait around to watch until something important - worth seeing and remembering - actually happens.
The use of drama, for example - which is the representation of behavior, in behavior and image - allows us
to watch the interplay of issues of mortal consequence, without the actors or the observers actually
suffering that consequence.
The capacity to abstract has not come without price, however. The incautious, imaginative (and
resentful) can easily use their gift of socially-constructed intelligence to undermine moral principles that
took eons to generate and that have valid but invisible reasons for their presence. Such "invisible"
principles can be subjected to facile criticism, by the historically ignorant, once they take imagistic, written
or spoken form. The consequence of this "criticism" is the undermining of necessary faith, and the
consequence dissolution of interpersonal predictability, dysregulation of emotion, and generation of
anomie, aggression and ideological gullibility (as the naked psyche strives to clothe itself, once again).
The danger of such criticism can be more particularly appreciated, when the effect of what might be
described as cascade is considered. We can change our behaviors because we change how we think -
although this is not as simple as is generally considered. We can change how we think, facilely, and
without regard for the consequences, partly because we do not understand why we think what we think
(because all the facts that govern our behavior are not at our "conscious" disposal) and because the effects
of that change are often not immediately apparent (may not be apparent for generations). The fact that
changes in tradition have unintended and often dangerous "side-effects" accounts for the conservatism of
most human cultures. "Cascade" means that threat to the perceived validity of any presupposition, at any
level (procedural, imagistic or episodic, explicit or semantic) threatens all levels simultaneously. This
means that the "casual" criticism of a given "explicit" presupposition can come, over time, to undermine
the "unconscious" imagistic and procedural "personality" and the emotional stability that accompanies it.
Words have a power that belie their ease of use.

Figure 49: The Fragmentary Representation of "Procedure and Custom" in Image and Word
Figure 49: The Fragmentary Representation of "Procedure and Custom" in Image and Word
provides a schematic representation of the organization of behavior and schemas of value in "memory."
Customs - that is, predictable and stable patterns of behavior - emerge and are stored "procedurally" as a
consequence of constant social interaction, over time, and as a result of the exchange of emotional
information that characterizes that interaction. You modify me, I modify you, we both modify others, etc.,
in a cycle that involves thousands of individuals, over thousands of years. Most of this information is a
more-or-less permanent part of the social network (is part of the structure of society), but can become
represented in part or whole in image, and then more explicitly, in verbal code. The imagistic
representation of the "morality" constituting a given society is likely to be incomplete, as the complexity of
the patterns emerging consequential to the totality of social interaction exceeds (current) representational
capacity. The semantic representations perched "above" the images are likely to be even more incomplete.
This means that the verbal systems utilized in abstract thinking, for example, only contain "part of the
puzzle," at best - only have partial information regarding the structure of the whole. So, while some of the
"rules" governing behavior have become completely explicit, and "understood," others will remain
partially implicit (and poorly "understood"). Some of these partially implicit rules are likely to exist for
completely implicit (and therefore completely invisible) reasons. It is rules like these - on the ragged edge
of comprehension - that are likely to attract ill-informed but nonetheless potentially devastating criticism.
202 






Abstract verbal intelligence may therefore pick holes in the "absurd mythological structure" that supports
it, without understanding either that it is supported, or that the act of undermining is existentially - mortally
- dangerous. It is easy to criticize the notion of the "immortal soul," for example - and the traditional forms
of morality that tend to accompany such a belief - without realizing that there is much more to the idea
than meets the eye.
"Cascade" means that threat to the perceived validity of any presupposition, at any level - generally
verbally mediated - now becomes threat to that presupposition, and everything that rests on it, at all levels.
The socially-mediated capacity to abstract - to reason and represent, in behavior, imagination and word -
means that an ill-chosen action, fantasy or thought may have devastating consequences. This is true in
particular of the word, the magic word - a-bra-ca-da-bra (a-b-c-d). One well-chosen phrase can change
everything ("from each according to his ability..."). The word, in a particular context (one established by
behavior and episodic representation) has a polysemous significance - it excludes more (constrains more)
than it appears to and means more than it "contains" (considered as an isolated or decontextualized
element). It has this capacity in part because it is capable of referring to phenomena outside its domain, in
order to make itself understood (this is use of metaphor). The word brings to mind events and actions,
sequenced in a particular manner; it is the (imaginary presentation) of these events and actions that contains
(much of) the meaning - the words merely act as cues for retrieval. The information retrieved is not
necessarily (yet) semantic; it may still remain embodied in episodic memory and procedure. The
polysemous quality of the meaningful word, which implies something for imagistic representation and for
the structuring of behavior, is what makes it potent and dangerous. An entire behavioral hierarchy can be
undermined by a well-chosen creative phrase, because the phrase brings with it, as integral part of an
integrated whole, moral presuppositions of entirely different, and perhaps logically (or at least apparently)
contrary nature.
There is an apocryphal story about a cosmologist, lecturing to a rural audience of laypeople in the late
1800's. He describes the basic structure of the solar system, laying emphasis on the fact that the earth floats
unsupported in space, endlessly circling the sun. After the lecture, an old woman approaches the podium
and says:
"That was a very interesting story, young man. Of course, it is completely absurd."
"Absurd, madam?" the lecturer inquired. "Whatever do you mean?"
"It is well known fact," replied the old woman, "that the earth rests on the back of a giant turtle."
"Is that so, ma'am. What, then, does the turtle rest on?"
"Don't play games with me, young man," responded the matron. "It"s turtles all the way down."93
Douglas Hofstadter presented a similar idea, in a fictional discussion between Achilles, the Greek hero, and
a tortoise (of Zeno's paradox fame):
"Tortoise: ... For purposes of illustration, let me suggest that you consider the simpler statement '29 is
prime.' Now in fact, this statement really means that 2 times 2 is not 29, and 5 times 6 is not 29, and so
forth, doesn't it?
Achilles: It must, I suppose.
Tortoise: But you are perfectly happy to collect all such facts together, and attach them in a bundle to
the number 29, saying merely, '29 is prime?'
Achilles: Yes...
Tortoise: And the number of facts involved is actually infinite, isn't it? After all, such facts as '4444
times 3333 is not 29' are all part of it, aren't they?
Achilles: Strictly speaking, I suppose so. But you and I both know that you can't produce 29 by
multiplying two numbers which are both bigger than 29. So in reality, saying '29 is prime' is only
summarizing a FINITE number of facts about multiplication.
Tortoise: You can put it that way if you want, but think of this: the fact that two numbers which are
bigger than 29 can't have a product equal to 29 involves the entire structure of the number system. In
that sense, that fact in itself is a summary of an infinite number of facts. You can't get away from the
fact, Achilles, that when you say '29 is prime,' you are actually stating an infinite number of things.
Achilles: Maybe so, but it feels like just one fact to me.
203 





Tortoise: That's because an infinitude of facts are contained in your prior knowledge - they are
embedded implicitly in the way you visualize things. You don't see an explicit infinity because it is
captured implicitly inside the images you manipulate."94
Jerome Bruner's comments on "triggers" are equally apropos here. He gives the following sentences as
examples: Trigger: "John saw/didn't see the chimera." Presupposition: "There exists a chimera." Trigger:
"John realized/didn't realize he was broke." Presupposition: "John was broke." Trigger: "John
managed/didn't manage to open the door." Presupposition: "John tried to open the door." There "exists" a
virtually infinite number of "presuppositions" for every "trigger." Bruner states: "Obviously you cannot
press a reader (or a listener) to make endless interpretations of your obscure remarks. But you can go a
surprisingly long way - provided only that you start with something approximating what Joseph Campbell
called a "mythologically instructed community."95 The transmission of what is generally regarded as
spiritual wisdom is in fact able to take (to be "reduced to") narrative form, precisely because the word - in
the context of the story, which is description of episodic representation of events and behaviors - has this
deceptively simple, yet infinitely meaningful "triggering" property:
Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard
seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field:

Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh

a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.
Another parable spake he unto them; The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took,
and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.
All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables; and without a parable spake he not to them:
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I
will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world. (Matthew 13:31-35).
It is not merely the story which is saturated with meaning; it is imagination, behavior and the practical
consequences of imagination and behavior, as well. The individual ideas, particular fantasies and personal
actions of individuals presuppose the culture from which they are derived. The word, in meaningful
context, is meaningful precisely because it provides information relevant to episodic representation, per se,
and because it has relevance - which may not be "consciously" comprehensible or declarable - for
behavior. Likewise, the behavior and fantasies of self and other - in context - are predicated upon
culturally-determined values and beliefs, and could be said, in a manner of speaking, to contain them. It is
for this reason that Jung could claim, with regards to the fantasies of a modern dreamer:
"He is in fact an unconscious exponent of an autonomous psychic development, just like the medieval
alchemist or the classical Neoplatonist. Hence one could say - cum grano salis - that history could be
constructed just as easily from one's own unconscious as from the actual texts."96
Even the more concrete implement or tool - like the word - is not an artifact separable from the culture
in which it is produced. It is failure to comprehend this fact that dooms many well-meaning "foreign aid"
projects - and, no less, the foreigners to which such aid is granted. Even something as "simple" as the
shovel or hoe presupposes the existence of a culture that has granted the individual dominion over nature -
that has granted the individual the right to make the Great Mother subservient to the claims of man. This
notion constitutes the central idea of complexly civilized patriarchal culture, and emerges into
consciousness, against competing claims, with the greatest of difficulty:
"An American-Indian prophet, Smohalla, of the tribe of Umatilla, refused to till the soil. 'It is a sin,' he
said, 'to wound or cut, to tear or scratch our common mother by working at agriculture.' And he added:
'You ask me to dig in the earth? Am I to take a knife and plunge it into the breast of my mother? But
then, when I die, she will not gather me again into her bosom. You tell me to dig up and take away the
stones. Must I mutilate her flesh so as to get at her bones? Then I can never again enter into her body
and be born again. You ask me to cut the grass and the corn and sell them, to get rich like the white men.
But how dare I crop the hair of my mother?'"97
204 





Every society shares a moral viewpoint, which is essentially an identity composed of unquestioned
fidelity to a particular conception of "reality" (what is and what should be), and of agreement upon the
nature of those behaviors that may reasonably be manifested. All the individuals in a particular nation
agree, fundamentally, about the nature of the unbearable present, the ideal future, and the means to
transform one into the other. Every individual plays out that conceptualization, in terms of his or her own
actions, more-or-less successfully; more successfully - or at least more easily - when nothing unintended
arises to make the act of questioning necessary; less successfully, when the moral action does not produce
the proper consequence. Any assumption can be challenged. The most fundamental expectation of my
fantasies - whatever they might be - is that my assumptions are valid. Mismatch between what I desired
and what actually occurred constitutes evidences that one or more of my assumptions are invalid (but not
necessarily information about which one, or at what level). The outcome of such a mismatch is application
of other (assumption-predicated) patterns of action, and associated expectations (hypothesis generation),
associated with gathering of new information, through active exploration. The further down the hierarchy
of assumption that mismatch occurs, the more stressful the occurrence, the more fear is disinhibited, the
more motivation for denial, the more necessity for exploration, the more necessary reprogramming of
behavioral assumption and matching sensory expectation.
A truly unexpected event sequence upsets the implicit assumptions upon which the original particular
fantasy was predicated - and not only that fantasy, but innumerable presently implicit others, equally
dependent for their existence upon those violated presuppositions. The inevitable consequence of such
violation is the breakdown of expectation, and consequent generation of fear and hope, followed by
exploration - the attempt to adapt to the new environment (to behave appropriately - to fulfill motivational
demands under new conditions - and to map new conditions). This consequence requires the paralysis of
the old model, reversion of otherwise stably maintained affects to competition and chaos, and explorationguided
reconstruction of order.
The more basic the level, the more that assumption is shared by virtually every conceivable fantasy. The
more basic the level undermined, the more anxiety and depression [and other motivation - particularly (and
non-evidently) hope] released from containment; the more behavioral adaptation cast into disrepute - the
more motivation for denial, deceit, fascistic readaptation, degeneration and despair - the more wish for
redemption. The undermining and reconstruction of more basic levels is, as we have seen, a revolutionary
act, even in the scientific domain. The "normal" scientist works within the constraints of great models; the
revolutionary changes the models. The normal scientist accepts the (current) game as valid, so to speak, and
tries to extend its relevant domain. The revolutionary scientist, who alters the rules of the game themselves,
is playing a different game (with different and dangerous rules, from a within-the-game perspective). Kuhn
states:
"The transition from a paradigm in crisis to a new one from which a new tradition of normal science can
emerge is far from a cumulative process, one achieved by an articulation or extension of the old
paradigm. Rather it is a reconstruction of the field from new fundamentals, a reconstruction that changes
some of the field's most elementary theoretical generalizations as well as many of its paradigm methods
and applications. During the transition period there will be a large but never complete overlap between
the problems that can be solved by the old and the new paradigm. But there will also be a decisive
difference in the modes of solution. When the transition is complete, the profession will have changed
its view of the field, its methods, and its goals."98
The normal scientist is often antithetical to his more extreme (more creative/destructive) counterpart -
like the good citizen opposes the heretic - in part because alteration of the rules changes the motivational
significance of (previously valued) action and thought - often, apparently, reducing it to zero (which means
that the revolutionary can completely destroy the significance of the career, past, present and future, of the
dedicated plodder); in part, because restructuring of the rules temporarily returns everything to a state of
(anxiety-provoking) chaos. Kuhn states:
"... a paradigm is [even] prerequisite to perception itself. What a man sees depends both upon what he
looks at and also upon what his previous visual-conceptual experience has taught him to see. In the
205 


absence of such training there can only be, in William James's phrase, 'a bloomin' buzzin'

confusion.'"99

That "bloomin' buzzin' confusion" - the Great Dragon of Chaos, in case it needs to be said - is not
affectively neutral: in fact, its affective significance, threat and promise, is perhaps all that can be
experienced of it, before it has been categorized.
Sometimes new information means mere lateral adjustment of behavior; so to speak - the modification
of approach, within a domain where still defined by the familiar goal. Sometimes, however, the unknown
emerges in a manner that demands a qualitative adjustment in adaptive strategy: the revaluation of past,
present and future, and acceptance of the suffering and confusion this necessarily entails. Kuhn comments
on the effect (and affect) of emergent and persistent unknown in the domain of science. The pattern he
describes characterized all cognitive revolutions, including those that take place in the universe of (normal)
morality:
"When... an anomaly comes to seem more than just another puzzle of normal science, the transition to
crisis and to extraordinary science has begun. The anomaly itself now comes to be more generally
recognized as such by the profession. More and more attention is devoted to it by the more and more of
the field's most eminent men. If it still continues to resist, as it usually does not, many of them may
come to view its resolution as the subject matter of their discipline. For them the field will no longer
look quite the same as it had earlier. Part of its different appearance results simply from the new fixation
point of scientific scrutiny. An even more important source of change is the divergent nature of the
numerous partial solutions that concerted attention to the problem has made available. The early attacks
upon the resistant problem will have followed the paradigm rules quite closely. But with continuing
resistance, more and more of the attacks upon it wIll have involved some minor or not so minor articulation
of the paradigm, no two of them quite alike, each partially successful, but none sufficiently so to be
accepted as paradigm by the group. Through this proliferation of divergent articulations (more and more
frequently they will come to be described as ad hoc adjustments), the rules of normal science become
increasingly blurred. Though there still is a paradigm, few practitioners prove to be entirely agreed about
what it is. Even formerly standard solutions of solved problems are called in question.
When acute, this situation is sometimes recognized by the scientists involved. Copernicus
complained that in his day astronomers were so "inconsistent in these [astronomical] investigations...
that they cannot even explain or observe the constant length of the seasonal year. "With them," he
continued, it is as though an artist were to gather the hands, feet, head and other members for his images
from diverse models, each part excellently drawn, but not related to a single body, and since they in no
way match each other, the result would be monster rather than man.400" Einstein, restricted by current
usage to less florid language, wrote only, "It was as if the ground had been pulled out from under one,
with no firm foundation to be seen anywhere, upon which one could have built.401" And Wolfgang
Pauli, in the months before Heisenberg's paper on matrix mechanics pointed the way to a new quantum
theory, wrote to a friend, "At the moment physics is again terribly confused. In any case, it is too
difficult for me, and I wish I had been a movie comedian or something of the sort and had never heard
of physics." That testimony is particularly impressive if contrasted with Pauli's words less than five
months later: "Heisenberg's type of mechanics has again given me hope and joy in life. To be sure it
does not supply the solution to the riddle, but I believe it is again possible to march forward.402"
403
Now, Kuhn drew a qualitative distinction between the normal and revolutionary modes of operation. No
such qualitative differences exist (although exemplars of the two types, drawn from the "extreme poles" of
the process of knowledge-production, can be easily be brought to mind). The distinction is more along the
lines of "transformation of what the group wants to transform" vs "transformation of what the group would
like to remain stable" - with the "revolutionary" changing more than might presently be desired (for the
maintenance of the extant social hierarchy, for example). The "transformation of what the group wants to
transform" is a form of bounded revolution, as we have discussed previously. Bounded revolutions produce
positive affect. Revolutions that upset the bounds themselves - which is what Kuhn's revolutionary
scientist produces - evoke fear (and denial, and aggression, as "defence mechanisms"). The
206 












"revolutionary" produces involuntary alteration in the "articles of faith" of the normal individual. It is this
capacity that makes him revolutionary, and necessary - and feared and despised. It may be more generally
said that processes of "discovery" which upset large-scale space-time "maps" produces disruption of affect
on an equivalent scale (and that it is such large-scale disruption that we entitle revolution).
Mythologically-structured social and individual "presumptions" - articles of faith - provide the
environment in which a given culture-specific adaptive pattern retains its conditional validity. This prerational
mythic environment is analogous in structure to the physical or natural environment itself - as the
structure adapted to the environment rapidly becomes a constituent element of the environment itself, with
the same essential characteristics. (Or, to say it somewhat differently - everything contained outside the
wall defining "presently considered space" is "environment" - even though much of it is actually the
consequence of historical or even individual activity). Disruption of the "pre-rational mythic
'environment'" is just as catastrophic as disruption of the "physical or natural environment" (the two
"disruptions" may not really be distinguishable, in the final analysis). This means essentially that to give
serious consideration to another's viewpoint means to risk exposure to indeterminate uncertainty - to risk a
rise in existential anxiety, pain and depression; to experience temporally indeterminate affective, imagistic
and cognitive chaos. It is much more likely, in consequence, that a foreign viewpoint will appear evil, or
will come to be defined as such, with passage of time (especially during times rendered unstable -
unbearably novel - for additional alternative reasons). Once such definition occurs, application of
aggression, designed to obliterate the source of threat, appears morally justified, even required by duty. The
alternative or foreign viewpoint is in fact reasonably considered evil (although this consideration is
dangerously one-sided), when viewed in terms of its potential destructive capacity, from within the strict
confines of the historically-determined social-psychological adaptive structure. It is only within the domain
of meta-morality (which is the morality designed to update moral rules) that the strange may be tolerated -
even welcomed.
The group, in its external social and intrapsychic incarnations, is the current expression of a form of
acting and thinking that has been given particular content over the course of thousands of years. These
particular contents, patterns of behavior (and their representations), were established initially by individuals
who faced the unknown and prevailed, who were able to do or think something that no one had been able to
do or think before. In this manner, heroic individuals create new assumptions and formulate new values.
The integration of these assumptions and values into the group, through the competitive process that begins
with imitation and ends with verbal abstraction, increases the permanent behavioral and abstract logical
repertoire of the individuals that form that group. The sum total of such behavioral patterns (and second
and third-order descriptions thereof), shared within a social group, constitutes that group. Groups are
predicated upon a collective, historically-determined structure of (abstractly represented) behavioral
patterns (and consequences thereof), which tends towards internal consistency, and stability over time.
Internalization of this behavioral pattern, and representations thereof, protects the individuals who compose
the group against fear of their own experience. The group is the culturally-determined hierarchical structure
of behavior - and abstracted conceptualization thereof - which inhibits fear of novelty, the Terrible Mother,
source of all nightmares. The group is the historical structure that humanity has erected between the
individual and the unknown. The group, in its beneficial guise, serves to protect the individuals who
compose it from threat and the unknown. The social establishment of how to behave, when presented with
a given situation, inhibits the paralyzing fear that situation would otherwise instinctively induce.
The group is also simultaneously the concrete historical expression of Homo sapiens' unique heroic
"thesis," as stated previously: that the nature of experience can be altered, for the better, by voluntary
alteration of action and thought. This central thesis is expressed in the myth of the way. Loss of
(previously extant) paradise initiates the "redemptive" activity, history; regain of paradise - in the course or
as a consequence of proper behavior - is its goal. This general pattern appears characteristic of all
civilizations, every philosophy, every ideology, all religions. The general idea that change may bring
improvement - upon which all voluntary change is predicated - is in itself based in the ideal upon the
assumption [on the (necessary) fiction] that through historical process perfection might be attained. This
myth - even in its earliest ritual incarnation - therefore provides the basis for the idea of progress itself.
The group, history incarnate, is the embodiment of a specific mode of being designed to attain perfection,
and contains the concrete expression of the goal of a people - it is the objective and subjective realization
207 











of the mode by which they improve their tragic condition. History not only protects people from the
unknown; it provides them with rules for achieving what they desire most, and, therefore, for expressing
the (essentially undeclarable) meaning of their lives.
Human moral knowledge progresses as procedural knowledge expands its domain, as episodic memory
encodes, ever more accurately, the patterns that characterize that knowledge, and as the semantic system
comes to explicitly represent the implicit principles upon which procedural knowledge and episodic
representation of that knowledge rest - and, of course, as the consequences of this second and third-order
representation alter the nature of procedure itself. Thus the democratic political theorist, for example, can
finally put into words the essence of religious myth after the myth had captured in image the essence of
adaptive behavior - can talk about "intrinsic right," as if that notion were something rational. This process
of increasing abstraction - and representation - is equivalent to development of "higher" consciousness
(especially if the ever-more enlightened words are in fact - utopian wish - transformed back down the
hierarchy to the level of action).
The major advantage of increased abstraction of representation - apart from ease of communication - is
increased adaptive flexibility: alterations in abstract thought can proceed "as if" - "as if" a game, without
immediate practical consequences, positive or negative.404 The disadvantage of this adaptive flexibility is
the emergence of ability to constantly (and inappropriately, in most cases) undermine the a priori
presumptions of the game - to call the rules into question; to dissolve impetus for action and to disinhibit
existential anxiety. A game is fun until the rules appear childish. Then the fun disappears. This might be
progress, in time. Until a new game appears, however, it is merely troublesome. The process of abstract
(semantic) inquiry is capable of undermining moral adaptation at each level - semantic, episodic and
procedural - simultaneously. This possibility might be regarded, once again, as a (destructive/beneficial)
side-effect of the ability to abstract.
The evolutionary construction of an adaptive social structure, simultaneously extant in behavior and in
semantic/episodic representation of that behavior, means abstraction and hierarchical organization of
knowledge hard-won in the physical battle for survival, and consequent capacity for immmediate
communication of that knowledge, in the absence of direct demonstration. Furthermore, it means potential
for alteration and experimentation in the abstract (in play, episodic and semantic), prior to application in the
real world. Acquisition of such ability - the capacity for abstract creative thought, and social exchange
thereof - means tremendous heightening of adaptive ability, as concepts constructed purely semantically
attain the capacity for alteration of episodic representation and procedure itself. Once the nature of morality
is coded semantically - once the implicit hierarchically-structured presuppositions of behavior have been
rendered explicit - they can be considered, debated, and altered in their essential nature. Such alteration is
capable of resonating, so to speak, down the cognitive chain to procedure itself. Likewise, alterations in
procedure are (and should be) capable of producing profound effects upon episodic and semantic
representation. This increased flexibility - the result of a tremendously complex and lengthy historical
development - is tremendously useful for the purposes of rapid adaptation and change, but also equally
facilitates conflict, social and intrapsychic. Such conflict emerges as a consequence of destabilization of
historical tradition.
It is the essential flexibility of the human brain, its very capacity to learn, and therefore to unlearn, that
renders Homo sapiens so appallingly susceptible to group and intrapsychic conflict. An animal's behavioral
pattern - its procedural knowledge - is set; its way of being in the unknown cannot easily be altered in its
fundament. The assumptions and values by which an individual human being lives can, by contrast, be
threatened with a few well-chosen and revolutionary words, whose ease of communication belies their
elaborately complex evolutionary history, the depth of heroic endeavor necessary to their formulation, and
their extreme current potency. Sufficiently novel verbally-transmitted information may disturb semantic,
episodic and procedural paradigm simultaneously, although the totality of such effects may not become
manifest for years - not infrequently, for generations.
Every culture maintains certain key beliefs, which are centrally important to that culture, upon which all
secondary beliefs are predicated. These key beliefs cannot be easily given up, because if they are,
everything falls, and the unknown once again rules. Western morality, western behavior, is for example
predicated on the assumption that every individual is sacred. This belief was already extant in its nascent
form, among the ancient Egyptians, and provides the very cornerstone of Judeo-Christian civilization.
208 


Successful challenge to this idea would invalidate the actions and goals of the western individual, would
destroy the western dominance hierarchy - the social context for individual action. In the absence of this
central assumption, the body of western law - formalized myth, codified morality - erodes and falls. There
are no individual rights, no individual value - and the foundation of the western social (and psychological)
structure dissolves. The Second World and Cold wars were fought largely to eliminate such a challenge.
For the man whose beliefs have become abstracted (and, therefore, more doubtful, more debatable), the
mere idea of the stranger is sufficient to disrupt the stability of everyday presumption. Tolstoy, in his
Confessions, recalls the impact of modern Western European ideas on the too-long static medieval culture
of Russia:
"I remember that when I was eleven years old a high-school boy named Volodin'ka M., now long since
dead, visited us one Sunday with an announcement of the latest discovery made at school. The discovery
was that there is no God and that the things they were teaching us were nothing but fairy tales (this was
in 1838). I remember how this news captured the interest of my older brothers; they even let me in on
their discussions. I remember that we were all very excited and that we took this news to be both
engaging and entirely possible."405
This "discovery," which was in fact the cumulative result of a very lengthy and traumatic Western
European cognitive process, had the capacity to undermine the most fundamental presuppositions of
Russian culture (as it had undermined those of the West):
"... since ancient times, when the life of which I do know something began, people who knew the
arguments concerning the vanity of life, the arguments that revealed to me its meaninglessness, lived
nonetheless, bringing to life a meaning of their own. Since the time when people somehow began to
live, this meaning of life has been with them, and they have led this life up to my own time. Everything
that is in me and around me is the fruit of their knowledge of life. The very tools of thought by which I
judge life and condemn it were created not by me but by them. I myself was born, educated and have
grown up thanks to them. They dug out the iron, taught us how to cut the timber, tamed the cattle and
the horses, showed us how to sow crops and live together; they brought order to our lives. They taught
me how to think and to speak. I am their offspring, nursed by them, reared by them, taught by them; I
think according to their thoughts, their words, and now I have proved to them that it is all
meaningless!"406
and eventually, inevitably, produced the following effects:
"It happened with me as it happens with everyone who contracts a fatal internal disease. At first there
were the insignificant symptoms of an ailment, which the patient ignores; then these symptoms recur
more and more frequently, until they merge into one continuous duration of suffering. The suffering
increases, and before he can turn around the patient discovers what he already knew: the thing he had
taken for a mere indisposition is in fact the most important thing on earth to him, is in fact death.
This is exactly what happened to me. I realized that this was not an incidental ailment but something
very serious, and that if the same questions should continue to recur, I would have to answer them. And
I tried to answer them. The questions seemed to be such foolish, simple, childish questions. But as soon
as I laid my hands on them and tried to resolve them, I was immediately convinced, first of all, that they
were not childish and foolish questions but the most vital and profound questions in life, and, secondly,
that no matter how much I pondered them there was no way I could resolve them. Before I could be
occupied with my Samara estate, with the education of my son, or with the writing of books, I had to
know why I was doing these things. As long as I do not know the reason why, I cannot do anything. In
the middle of my concern with the household, which at the time kept me quite busy, a question would
suddenly come into my head: 'Very well, you will have 6000 desyatins in the Samara province, as well
as 300 horses; what then?' And I was completely taken aback and did not know what else to think. As
soon as I started to think about the education of my children, I would ask myself, 'Why?' Or I would
reflect on how the people might attain prosperity, and I would suddenly ask myself, 'What concern is it
of mine?' Or in the middle of thinking about the fame that my works were bringing me I would say to
209 





myself, 'Very well, you will be more famous than Gogol, Pushkin, Shakespeare, Moliere, more famous
than all the writers in the world - so what?'
And I could find absolutely no reply.
My life came to a stop. I could breathe, eat, drink, and sleep; indeed, I could not help but breathe, eat,
drink, and sleep. But there was no life in me because I had no desires whose satisfaction I would have
found reasonable. If I wanted something, I knew beforehand that it did not matter whether or not I got it.
If a fairy had come and offered to fulfill my every wish, I would not have known what to wish for. If
in moments of intoxication I should have not desires but the habits of old desires, in moments of
sobriety I knew that it was all a delusion, that I really desired nothing. I did not even want to discover
truth anymore because I had guessed what it was. The truth was that life is meaningless.
It was as though I had lived a little, wandered a little, until I came to the precipice, and I clearly saw
that there was nothing ahead except ruin. And there was no stopping, no turning back, no closing my
eyes so I would not see that there was nothing ahead except the deception of life and of happiness and
the reality of suffering and death, of complete annihilation.
I grew sick of life; some irresistible force was leading me to somehow get rid of it. It was not that I
wanted to kill myself. The force that was leading me away from life was more powerful, more absolute,
more all-encompassing than any desire. With all my strength I struggled to get away from life. The
thought of suicide came to me as naturally then as the thought of improving life had come to me before.
This thought was such a temptation that I had to use cunning against myself in order not to go through
with it too hastily. I did not want to be in a hurry only because I wanted to use all my strength to
untangle my thoughts. If I could not get them untangled, I told myself, I could always go ahead with it.
And there I was, a fortunate man, carrying a rope from my room where I was alone every night as I
undressed, so that I would not hang myself from the beam between the closets. And I quit going hunting
with a gun, so that I would not be too easily tempted to rid myself of life. I myself did not know what I
wanted. I was afraid of life, I struggled to get rid of it, and yet I hoped for something from it.
And this was happening to me at a time when, from all indications, I should have been considered a
completely happy man; this was when I was not yet fifty years old. I had a good, loving, and beloved
wife, fine children, and a large estate that was growing and expanding without any effort on my part.
More than ever before I was respected by friends and acquaintances, praised by strangers, and I could
claim a certain renown without really deluding myself. Moreover, I was not physically and mentally
unhealthy; on the contrary, I enjoyed a physical and mental vigor such as I had rarely encountered
among others my age. Physically, I could keep up with the peasants working in the fields; mentally, I
could work eight and ten hours at a stretch without suffering any aftereffects from the strain. And in
such a state of affairs I came to a point where I could not live; and even though I feared death, I had to
employ ruses against myself to keep from committing suicide.
I described my spiritual condition to myself in this way: my life is some kind of stupid and evil
practical joke that someone is playing on me. In spite of the fact that I did not acknowledge the
existence of any 'Someone' who might have created me, the notion that someone brought me into the
world as a stupid and evil joke seemed to be the most natural way to describe my condition."407
Group identity - inculcated morality and accepted interpretation - serves to constrain the motivational
significance of experiential phenomena. When that identity (which is predicated upon implicit or explicitly
held faith in a particular conceptualization of the way) is challenged, such constraints vanish. This
"deconstruction" of symbolically patriarchal custom and belief subjects the individual to intrapsychic war
of conflicting affect - the "clash of opposites," in Jungian terms - subjugates him or her to unbearable
cognitive, emotional and moral conflict. Nietzsche's comments on Hamlet, "sicklied o'er by the pale cast
of thought," are relevant in this context:
"Knowledge kills action; action requires the veils of illusion: that is the doctrine of Hamlet.... Now no
comfort avails any more; longing transcends a world after death, even the gods; existence is negated
210 
along with its glittering reflection in the gods or in an immortal beyond. Conscious of the truth he has
once seen, man now sees everywhere only the horror or absurdity of existence; now he understands what
is symbolic in Ophelia's fate; now he understands the wisdom of the sylvan god, Silenus: he is
nauseated.408"
409
Dostoevski's tragically comic bureaucratic-personality-disordered protagonist (the metaphoric mouse)
in Notes from Underground reacts similarly, comparing his own (sophisticated) inability to respond
courageously to an insult, to that of l'homme de la nature et de la verite - the natural, and therefore
truthful, yet comparatively unconscious (procedural) man:
"Let us now look at the mouse in action. Suppose, for example, that it too has been insulted (and it will
almost always be subjected to slights) and desires revenge. Perhaps even more fury will accumulate
inside it than inside l'homme de la nature et de la verite because l'homme de la nature et de la verite,
with his innate stupidity, considers his revenge to be no more than justice, while the mouse, with its
heightened consciousness, denies that there is any justice about it. At last comes the act itself, the
revenge. The wretched mouse has by this time accumulated, in addition to the original nastiness, so
many other nastinesses in the shape of questions and doubts, and so many other unresolved problems in
addition to the original problem, that it has involuntarily collected round itself a fatal morass, a stinking
bog, consisting of its own doubts and agitations, and finally of the spittle rained on it by all the
spontaneous men of action standing portentously round as judges and referees, and howling with
laughter. Of course, nothing remains for it do but shrug the whole thing off and creep shamefacedly into
its hole with a smile of pretended contempt in which it doesn't even believe itself."410
The fictional characters of Shakespeare and Dostoevski respond like the flesh-and-blood man, Tolstoy, to
the same historically-determined set of circumstances - to the "death of god," in Nietzsche's terminology,
brought about, inexorably, by continued development of abstract consciousness. The "first modern man,"
Hamlet - and those who follow him, in art and in life - characteristically respond like Nietzsche's "pale
criminal"; like Raskolnikov, unable to bear the "terrible beauty"411 of their deeds. Nietzsche states:
"Of what is great one must either be silent or speak with greatness. With greatness - that means
cynically and with innocence. What I relate is the history of the next two centuries. I describe what is
coming, what can no longer come differently: the advent of nihilism.... Our whole European culture is
moving for some time now, with a tortured tension that is growing from decade to decade, as toward a
catastrophe: restlessly, violently, headlong, like a river that wants to reach the end, that no longer
reflects, that is afraid to reflect.
He that speaks here has, conversely, done nothing so far but to reflect: as a philosopher and solitary
by instinct who has found his advantage in standing aside, outside. Why has the advent of nihilism
become necessary? Because the values we have had hitherto thus draw their final consequence; because
nihilism represents the ultimate logical conclusion of our great values and ideals-because we must
experience nihilism before we can find out what value these "values" really had.
We require, at some time, new values.
Nihilism stands at the door: whence comes this uncanniest of all guests?
Point of departure: it is an error to consider "social distress" or "physiological degeneration," or
corruption of all things, as the cause of nihilism. Ours is the most honest and compassionate age.
Distress, whether psychic, physical, or intellectual, need not at all produce nihilism (that is, the radical
rejection of value, meaning, and desirability). Such distress always permits a variety of interpretations.
Rather: it is in one particular interpretation, the Christian moral one, that nihilism is rooted.
The end of Christianity - at the hands of its own morality (which cannot be replaced), which turns
against the Christian God: the sense of truthfulness, highly developed by Christianity, is nauseated by
the falseness and mendaciousness of all Christian interpretations of the world and of history; rebound
from "God is the truth" to the fanatical faith "All is false"; an active Buddhism.
211 






Skepticism regarding morality is what is decisive. The end of the moral interpretation of the world,
which no longer has any sanction after it has tried to escape into some beyond, leads to nihilism.
"All lacks meaning." (The untenability of one interpretation of the world, upon which a tremendous
amount of energy has been lavished, awakens the suspicion that all interpretations of the world are
false.)"412
(That, in a nutshell, is "cascade.")
Nihilism, alter-ego of totalitarianism, is response to experience of the world, self and other, rendered
devoid of certain meaning, and therefore allowed no meaning; is reaction to the world freed from the
(unconscious) constraints of habit, custom and belief; is response to the re-emergence of the terrible
unknown; is reaction of a spirit no longer able, as a consequence of abstract critical ability, to manifest
(unconscious or procedural) identity with the hero - no longer able to muster belief in human possibility, in
the face of exposure to the most dreadful imaginable. Phenomena remain constrained in their (affective)
significance, at least partially, because the group (the dominance hierarchy) has reached agreement as to
their meaning (their implications for situation-specific action). When that hierarchy falls - perhaps as a
consequence of emergent disbelief in central presumption - nothing remains "sacred." This process
becomes evidently manifest, from the empirical viewpoint, during a riot. When law and order are held
temporarily in abeyance [when the inhibitory force of imposed threat is relieved (when the dominance
hierarchy momentarily collapses)], those whose moral behavior remains predicated upon resentful
obedience fall prey to their own disordered affect, and explode in aggression, greed, hatred, and vengeful
destructiveness. This explosion [implosion (?)] is "reduction to the precosmogonic continuum," from the
pre-experimental or mythic viewpoint413 - is regression to the time and place prior to the division of things
into known and unknown. This can be viewed either as alteration in affect, or transformation of the
motivational significance of the phenomena whose apprehension motivates behavior. The objective mind
would postulate the former; the mythic mind, concerned with subjective reality, the latter. This form of
regression exists as precondition to creative restructuring. Semi-conscious (semi-declarative) apprehension
of this affect-laden state (manifest as paralyzing fear) exists (fortunately and catastrophically) as the
greatest impediment to change.
The dominance hierarchy of value, extant socially and intrapsychically, employs fear (and promise) to
regulate access to desired commodities - to determine the net motivational significance of particular events
and processes. Any given phenomena is capable of inducing a variety of affective or motivational states. It
is (the socially and individually determined) outcome of competition between these (intrapsychic) states
that determines behavioral output. The internalized consequence of the external dominance hierarchy -
which is the "intrapsychic patriarchy," Freud's superego - is knowledge of the net motivational relevance
of phenomena, within a particular society. This implies - as stated previously - that the (historicallydetermined)
power structure of a given society could be inferred through analysis of the significance
granted technological and cognitive artifacts by the individuals within that society. What is desired depends
upon the goal towards which a given society moves. The goal is posited as valuable, initially, as a
consequence of the operation of unconscious "presumptions," hypothetically preceding action. The value
presupposed by the action is then coded episodically, then, perhaps, formalized semantically. Someone
from a different culture values things differently; this difference is predicated upon acceptance of an
alternate goal-directed schema. The nature and presence of this difference may be inferred (will, in fact,
necessarily be inferred) from observation of foreign behavior, imagination and discussion - even inferred,
perhaps, from exposure to cultural artifacts (which are generally granted the status of "mere" tools, which
is to say, implements of the way) or from cues as subtle as voice or procedural melody.414
Movement from one schema to another - or from both to a hypothetical third, which unites both (which
might constitute the consequence of revolutionary heroic effort) - presupposes dissolution (mutual or
singular) - not mere addition (presupposes a "qualitative" shift, not a "quantitative" shift). Mythically, as
we have seen, this movement might be represented as descent from the precipice into the abyss, as the
collapse of the idol with feet of clay, as dissolution to constituent bodily or material elements, as journey to
the underworld or sea bottom, as sojourn through the valley of the shadow of death, as forty years (or forty
days) in the desert, as encounter with the hydra, as incest with the mother. When such a journey is
212 




undertaken voluntarily - resources prepared adequately beforehand, faith in place - chance of success
(return, reconstitution, resurrection, ascent) is substantially enhanced. When dissolution occurs accidently -
when encounter with the unknown is unintentional,415 or avoided beyond its time of inevitable occurrence -
intrapsychic or social catastrophe, suicide or war, becomes certain.
The goal towards which behavior is devoted serves as one pole of the cognitive schema which
determines the motivational significance of events. Members of the same culture share the same goal. This
goal consists of a hypothetical desired end-state, which exists in contrast to some conceptualization of the
present, and which can be attained through participation in a particular consensually-accepted and
traditionally-determined process. This schema is analogous in structure to the complete mythological
conception of the way, which includes a representation of the (troubled) present, a conception of the
(desired) future, and a description of methods (moral prescriptions and injunctions) for transforming the
former into the latter. Moral knowledge serves to further the way by reducing the infinite potential
motivational significance of particular events to the particular and determinate. This process of reduction is
social in nature - events take on established meaning that is socially determined, shared. The affective
relevance of a given phenomenon - which, most fundamentally, is its significance for goal-directed
behavior - is a consequence of the operation of the goal-oriented schema, which finds partial expression in
establishment of a dominance hierarchy. A dominance hierarchy is a social arrangement which determines
access to desired commodities. In most cases, these commodities are cues for consummatory reward -
experiences which signify movement towards, or increased likelihood of attaining, the desired goal.
Relative position in the dominance hierarchy - at least in the perfectly functioning society - is in itself
determined through social judgment. That judgment reflects appreciation of the value of a particular
individual. That value reflects how society views the ability of that individual to contribute to attainment of
the goal. This interpretation of course implies that the postulation of a given way necessarily, inevitably,
produces a hierarchy of value (since people and things will inevitably differ in their utility as means to the
desired end). Every phenomena, experienced within the confines of a particular society, is laden with
dominance-hierarchy and goal-schema relevant information. The value of any particular item or experience
is determined by the mythic foundation, upon which the entire society, consciously and unconsciously,
rests. This value is the magic of the object.
Schismatic activity, semantic, episodic, or procedural, might be considered the within-group equivalent
to arrival of an (abstracted or concrete) stranger. Cultural schisms emerge when once-predictable and
familiar individuals become possessed by novel behavioral notions, imagery or semantic formulations,
which present a challenge to presumptions deemed necessarily inviolable - such as the (most dangerous,
authoritarian) presumption that all currently accepted presumptions are "true." Medieval horror of heresy -
and the drastic responses to such ideation defined as necessary by the Catholic guardians of proper thought
- is rendered comprehensible as a consequence of consideration (1) of the protective function of intact
dogma and (2) of the methodological impossibility of "disproving," so to speak, alternative mythicallyfounded
narrative ideas, once postulated. The Christian church fragmented chaotically (and, perhaps,
creatively) - and continues to do so - with horrendous consequences, even under conditions where such
fragmentation was severely punished. This is not stated to provided justification for repression of creativity,
but to make the motivation for such repression understandable. Degeneration into chaos - decadence -
might be considered the constant threat of innovation undertaken in the absence of comprehension and
respect for tradition. Such decadence is precisely as dangerous to the stability and adaptability of the
community (and the individual) - and as purely motivated by underground wishes and desires - as
totalitarianism or desire for absolute order. The (continuing) absence of a generally accepted methodology
for peaceably sorting out relative value or validity of evident mythologically-predicated differences helps
ensure that savage repression will remain the frequently utilized alternative.
Rapid development of semantic skill (and its second-order elaboration into empirical methodology)
constitutes the third major threat to the continued stability of sociohistorically-determined adaptive cultural
systems (as well as the major factor in the complex elaboration of such systems). (The first two - just a
reminder - were rapid natural environmental shift, independent of human activity, and contact with a
heretofore isolated foreign culture). Literate individuals, members of cultures contained in express
theologies or (rational) philosophies, can more easily incarnate and/or abstractly adopt or provisionally
formulate different positions, with regards to the value of initial assumptions; can also verbalize the beliefs
213 




of other people, absorb them, and subject them to critical consideration or (theoretically) guileless
acceptance; are fated necessarily to be able to become many other people, in imitation, imagination, and
thought. Linguistically-mediated criticism of the predicates of behavior undermines faith in the validity of
historically-established hierarchical patterns of adaptation. The final emergent process of the
developmental chain of abstraction can be applied to undermine the stability of its foundation. The modern
and verbally-sophisticated individual is therefore always in danger of sawing off the branch on which he or
she sits.
Language turned drama into mythic narrative, narrative into formal religion, and religion into critical
philosophy, providing exponential expansion of adaptive ability - while simultaneously undermining
assumption and expectation, and dividing knowledge from action. Civilized homo sapiens can use words to
destroy what words did not create. This ability has left modern individuals increasingly subject to their
worst fears. Nietzsche states:
"Our Europe of today, being the arena of an absurdly sudden attempt at a radical mixture of classes, and
hence races, is therefore skeptical in all its heights and depths - sometimes with that mobile skepticism
which leaps impatiently and lasciviously from branch to branch, sometimes dismal like a cloud
overcharged with question marks - and often mortally sick of its will. Paralysis of the will: where today
does one not find this cripple sitting? And often in such finery! How seductive the finery looks! This
disease enjoys the most beautiful pomp-and-lie-costumes; and most of what today displays itself in the
showcases, for example, as 'objectivity,' 'being scientific,' 'l'art pour l'art,' 'pure knowledge, free of
will,' is merely dressed-up skepticism and paralysis of the will: for this diagnosis of the European
sickness I vouch."416
The intellectual developments which lead to the establishment of modern scientific methodology have
heightened the danger of this partially pathological tendency. The construction of a powerful and accurate
representation of the "objective" or shared world - a logical conclusion of the interpersonal exchange of
sensory information, made possible by linguistic communication - challenged belief in the reality of the
mythic world, which was in fact never objective, from the perspective of perception and sensation. The
mythic world was always affective, never "objective" - although it was shared socially - and contained
procedural information (and abstracted representation thereof), arranged hierarchically in terms of value,
embodied in non-verbal procedural and abstracted imagistic and semantic form. Representation of mythic
value in verbal format allowed for simple experimentation in ethics, in imagination (and then, often
tragically, in action), and for generation of naive but effective criticism regarding traditional foundations
for behavior. Nietzsche states:
"For this is the way in which religions are wont to die out: under the stern, intelligent eyes of an
orthodox dogmatism, the mythical premises of a religion are systematized as a sum total of historical
events; one begins apprehensively to defend the credibility of the myths, while at the same time one
opposes any continuation of their natural vitality and growth; the feeling for myth perishes, and its place
is taken by the claim of religion to historical foundations."417
Freud maintained - as an ideal nineteenth century empiricist - that "there is no other source of
knowledge of the universe but the intellectual manipulation of carefully verified observations - that is,
what is called research - and that no knowledge can be obtained from revelation, intuition or inspiration."
He says, furthermore, that "there is no appeal beyond reason"418 (grounded directly in "observation," one
would presume). This description leaves no place for the primal role of affect (or even of sensation, for that
matter) in determination of wisdom - "what causes me (and others) pain is wrong," in the most basic (and
naive) form - and also fails to address the issue of the source of scientific hypotheses in general (the
narrative process). Furthermore, pure knowledge of the sensory world - what is, most fundamentally - does
not include knowledge about how to adapt to or behave in that world (even though the gathering of such
information has obvious implications for such adaptation). Tolstoy states:
"As presented by the learned and the wise, rational knowledge denies the meaning of life, but the huge
masses of people acknowledge meaning through an irrational knowledge. And this irrational knowledge
is faith, the one thing that I could not accept. This involves the God who is both one and three, the
214 


creation in six days, devils, angels and everything else that I could not accept without taking leave of my
senses.
My position was terrible. I knew that I could find nothing in the way of rational knowledge except a
denial of life; and in faith I could find nothing except a denial of reason, and this was even more
impossible than a denial of life. According to rational knowledge, it followed that life is evil, and people
know it. They do not have to live, yet they have lived and they do live, just as I myself had lived, even
though I had known for a long time that life is meaningless and evil. According to faith, it followed that
in order to understand the meaning of life I would have to turn away from reason, the very thing for
which meaning was necessary."419
Mythic thinking, so to speak, is also based on observation - but on observation of behavior in the world of
affective experience. This means (cyclical) observation of action predicated upon an (implicit or explicitly
formulated) theory of what should be, and derivation of procedural, episodic or semantic representations
thereof. This is knowledge, as well - and appears, in the light of careful analysis, no more arbitrary than
empirical description of the objective world.
Perhaps it was necessary for science, struggling to escape from a cognitive world dominated by religious
and mythical thinking, to devalue that world, in order to set up an independent existence. That existence
has long been established, however - but the process of devaluation, implicit and explicit, continues (even
in fields theoretically fall separate from the strictly empirical). Frye states:
"Ever since Plato, most literary critics have connected the word "thought" with dialectical and
conceptual idioms, and ignored or denied the existence of poetic and imaginative thought. This attitude
continued into the twentieth century with I.A. Richards's Science and Poetry, with its suggestion that
mythical thinking has been superseded by scientific thinking, and that consequently poets must confine
themselves to pseudo-statements. The early criticism of T.S. Eliot, though considerably more cautious
than this, also exhibited an array of confusions clustering around the word 'thought.' Since then there
has been a slowly growing realization that mythological thinking cannot be superseded, because it forms
the framework and context for all thinking. But the old views still persist, if in more sophisticated forms,
and there are still far too many literary critics who are both ignorant and contemptuous of the mental
processes that produce literature."420
Nietzsche states, similarly - but with somewhat more scorn:
"Every age has its own divine type of naivety for whose invention other ages may envy it - and how
much naivety, venerable, childlike and boundlessly clumsy naivety lies in the scholar's faith in his
superiority, in the good conscience of his tolerance, in the unsuspecting simple certainly with which his
instinct treats the religious man as an inferior and lower type that he has outgrown, leaving it behind,
beneath him - him, that presumptuous little dwarf and rabble man, the assiduous and speedy head- and
handiworker of "ideas," of "modern ideas!"421
Mythological thinking is not mere arbitrary superstition. Its denigration - cascading even through literary
criticism, in recent years - is not only unwarranted, but perilous. This is not to say that religious institutions
and dogmas are not prey to the same weaknesses as all other human creations. The ideas and patterns of
action that underlay and generated those institutions remain of critical importance, however - remain
important for sustaining individual emotional stability, maintaining group tolerance, cohesion and
flexibility, supporting capacity to adapt to the strange, and strengthening ability to resist domination by
one-sided and murderous ideologies.
. The idea that we have superseded such thinking is a prime example of the capacity of the "semantic
system" to partially represent, and to thoroughly criticize. This is wrong, arrogant, and dangerous.
The group promotes an integrated pattern of behavior and conception of values. This is strength, in that
an integrated pattern provides one message, and therefore promotes unity and direction. It is also weakness,
in that integration - stable, hierarchically organized structure - is inflexible, and therefore brittle. This
means the group, and those who identify with it, cannot easily develop new modes of perception, or change
direction, when such change or development becomes necessary. Under stable environmental and social
215 





conditions, this is an advantage, as what worked in the past will continue to work in the present. However,
in times of transition, of rapid environmental transformation, of multi-cultural contact, of technological or
ideological advance, stability is not necessarily sufficient. The Russian neuropsychologist Sokolov stated
(as cited previously 422) "One way to improve the quality of extrapolation [judgment of match between
intent and outcome] is to secure additional information; another method is to change the principles by
which such information is handled, so that the process of regulation will prove more effective." This
fundamental idea is embodied in mythology in the figure of the revolutionary hero. He is the fourth manner
in which threat to the stability of cultural tradition may be presented - and, simultaneously: is solution to
the ever-recurring problem of such threat.
4.2.4. The Revolutionary Hero
The revolutionary hero re-orders the protective structure of society, when the emergence of an anomaly
makes such re-ordering necessary. He is therefore the agent of change, upon whose actions all stability is
predicated. This capacity - which should make him a welcome figure in every community - is exceedingly
threatening to those completely encapsulated by the status quo, and who are unable or unwilling to see
where the present state of adaptation is incomplete, and where residual danger lies. The archetypal
revolutionary hero therefore faces the anger and rejection of his peers, as well as the terrors of the
absolutely unknown. He is nonetheless the "best friend" of the state.
Analysis of the archaic ecstatic practice of shamanism - prevalent throughout "the immense area
comprising Central and North Asia"423 - sheds further light on the nature of the actions and typical
experiences of the revolutionary hero. Europeans who made initial contact with these tribal healers
frequently deemed them insane. The reverse was in fact true: the genuine shaman was the most sane man of
the tribe (that is, the man whose extent of adaptation was greatest). Furthermore, he served as primordial
"unified ancestor" of the lately differentiated or specialized creative agent: explorer, mystic, artist, scientist
and physician. The Asian shaman was master of religious life, embodiment and keeper of the sacred
doctrine, dominant authority and creator of culture.
The widespread practices and viewpoints of shamanism constitute a cohesive philosophy, so to speak,
embedded "unconsciously" in behavior and image. This ritual philosophy comprises a set of observations
about the nature of radical personality transformation, and practices designed to bring such alteration about.
Shamanism is devoted towards furtherance of the possibility of qualitative improvements in
"consciousness" or general adaptive ability; has captured the essence of such possibility in image, to
minimize the accompanying terror. Shamanism is prototypical of those religious practices designed to
modify human behavior and interpretation - to induce and regulate the processes of spiritual mutation.
These practices are not merely cultural in nature. They originate in the observation of spontaneous
psychological transmutation - a psychobiologically-grounded human capacity. Shamanic rituals are
therefore not merely anachronistic, without modern relevance, except as curiosity dictates - but prime
exemplars of a process we must come to understand.
The shaman is not simply an archaic figure, an interesting anomaly from the dead past - he is the
embodiment, in cultures we do not understand, of those people we admire most in the past. The phenomena
of the "creative illness" - described in detail by Henri Ellenberger, in his massive study of the history of the
unconscious - is alive and well in our own culture. Ellenberger described its characteristic elements:
"A creative illness succeeds a period of intense preoccupation with an idea and search for a certain truth.
It is a polymorphous condition that can take the shape of depression, neurosis, psychosomatic ailments,
or even psychosis. Whatever the symptoms, they are felt as painful, if not agonizing, by the subject, with
alternating periods of alleviation and worsening. Throughout the illness the subject never loses the
thread of his dominating preoccupation. It is often compatible with normal, professional activity and
family life. But even if he keeps to his social activities, he is almost entirely absorbed with himself. He
suffers from feelings of utter isolation, even when he has a mentor who guides him through the ordeal
(like the shaman apprentice with his master). The termination is often rapid and marked by a phase of
exhilaration. The subject emerges from his ordeal with a permanent transformation in his personality
and the conviction that he has discovered a great truth or a new spiritual world."424

Many of the nineteenth and twentieth century figures recognized unquestionably as "great" - Nietzsche,
Darwin, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Freud, Jung, Piaget - were all additionally characterized by lengthy periods
of profound psychological unrest and uncertainty. Their "psychopathology" - a term ridiculous in this
context - was generated as a consequence of the revolutionary nature of their personal experience (their
action, fantasy and thought). It is no great leap of comparative psychology to see their role in our society as
analogous to that of the archaic religious leader and healer.

Figure 50: The "Dual Death" of the Revolutionary Hero
For the average "tribal" individual, initiation - socially imposed - signifies the death of childhood, and
reintegration on the level of social maturity. For the future shaman, initiation - voluntarily undertaken -
signifies the disintegration of socially-determined adult personality, and reintegration at the level of unique
individuality. This process is illustrated in Figure 50: The "Dual Death" of the Revolutionary Hero.
Those who undergo a second initiation suffer more deeply and profoundly from life than their peers; are, in
Jung's phrase, the most "complex and differentiated minds of their age."425 These creative individuals
detect emergent anomaly, and begin the process of adaptation to it, long before the average person notices
any change in circumstance whatsoever. In his ecstasy the shaman lives the potential future life of his
society. This dangerous individual can play a healing role in his community because he has suffered more
through experience than his peers. If someone in the community (or the community itself) becomes ill,
breaks down - begins the journey, so speak, to the land of the dead, the terrible unknown - the shaman is
there to serve as guide, to provide rationale for current experience, to reunite the suffering individual with
217 





his community, or to renew the community - to restabilize the paradigmatic context of expectation and
desire within which individual and social experience remains tolerable. The truly creative individual has
"been there, and done that," and can therefore serve as a guide to others voluntary beginning - or roughly
thrown into - similar voyages.
The archaic shamanic initiate was commonly someone uniquely marked by fate, by the "will of the
gods" - by particular heredity, "magical" (novel) occurrence in early childhood or later in life (birth in a
caul; survival of lightning strike), or by intrapsychic idiosyncrasy (epileptic susceptibility, visionary
proclivity).426 His unique personality or experiential history, in combination with presently extant social
conditions, doomed him to experience so anomalous that it could not simultaneously be accepted as
actually occuring - as real - and as possible within the confines determined by ruling social presumption.
The existence of this experience - if "admitted" and "processed" - therefore presented a potentially fatal
challenge to the perceived validity of the axioms currently underlying the maintenance of normal "sanity" -
the sociohistorically determined stability of mutually-determined behavioral adaptation and experiential
significance. The existence of this distinct experience served as a gateway to the unknown, so to speak - or,
as a floodgate, a portal, through which the unexpected could pour, with inevitably destructive and
potentially creative consequences. The shaman is the individual who chooses to meet such a flood, head on.
The shaman, the ecstatic in general - equally, the revolutionary philosopher or scientist, true to himself
- is characterized by stubborn adherence to his own idiosyncratic field of experience, in which occurrences
emerge, procedural, episodic or semantic in structure, that are foreign to the predictably socialized man,
and his prosaic moral expectation. The experiential range of the creative agent transcends the domain of the
current adaptive sufficiency of his culture, as it is extant socially and embodied and represented
intrapsychically. Rather than ignoring or failing to process such occurrences (which exist in contradiction
to or completely outside his conditional, socially-determined expectations), and acting as though they do
not exist, the creative individual (voluntarily) admits their reality, and submits himself to the dissolution of
his current (moral) world-view and pattern of action. This dissolution of personality, equivalent in episodic
representation to death, temporarily "re-novelizes" experience; furthermore, provides the precondition for
more inclusive resurrection of order, personal and social.
The future shaman is in fact tormented by the incomplete or self-contradictory state of his cultural
structure, as it is intrapsychically represented; is undergoing a breakdown induced by some aspect of
personal experience, some existential anomaly, that cannot be easily integrated into that structure. This
breakdown re-exposes him to the unknown - previously covered, so to speak, by his culture. His
comportment during the period of incubation preceding his emergence as shaman is generally marked by
commission of acts considered characteristic, in modern and archaic culture alike, of serious mental
breakdown. He behaves idiosyncratically, seeking solitude, flying into fits of rage, losing consciousness,
living in the mountains or woods alone, and suffering from visions and periods of absent-mindedness. His
peers explain his odd behavior by possession. This experience of dissolution and re-exposure to chaos
accompanies intrapsychic subjugation to the operation of innate, involuntary [episodic, limbic, righthemisphere-governed
(?)] mechanisms responsible for the deconstruction and renewal of conditional
knowledge. This operation manifests itself subjectively in structured mythic experience - in spontaneous
personal experience, which adheres to the pattern associated with ritualized social initiation, and which
may also have served, originally, as its source.
The soul of the shaman is "carried away by spirits" - habituants of the episodic realm - and returned to
"the place of the gods." This place exists outside of time and space itself, on the same plane of pleromatic
reality as the prehistoric and post-apocalyptic Paradise. "Entry" into this domain is preceded by complete
psychic disintegration, accompanied by horrifying visions of torture, dismemberment and death. The
shamanic initiate descends into the matriarchal hell that preceded and co-exists with creation, passing
through clashing rocks, or gates in the shape of jaws; he is reduced to a skeleton, while his disembodied
head observes the procedure; he has his internal organs removed or restructured; his bones are broken, his
eyes gouged out. He is devoured by a serpent, or a giantess; is boiled, roasted or otherwise reduced to his
essential and fundamental structure - to his very bones. Eliade states:
"The total crisis of the future shaman, sometimes leading to complete disintegration of the personality
and to madness, can be valuated not only as an initiatory death but also as a symbolic return to the
218 





precosmogonic Chaos, to the amorphous and indescribable state that precedes any cosmogony. Now, as
we know, for archaic and traditional cultures, a symbolic return to Chaos is equivalent to preparing a
new Creation. It follows that we may interpret the psychic Chaos of the future shaman as a sign that the
profane man is being "dissolved" and a new personality being prepared for birth."427
This disintegration is the removal of experience - objects and processes - from their socially-determined
state of provisional paradigm-governed significance, and their return to the affectively numinous unknown,
infinitely threatening and promising. Exposure to consequently renovelized experience constitutes the
affective and motivational core of the ecstatic experience, the basis for the religious experience (and the
experience of meaning) as such - prior to its entrapment and canalization in dogma. Dissolution is
experienced in imaginal or episodic representation, as death - an accurate conceptualization, death of
socialized personality: dissolution of the presently constituted intrapsychic representation and procedural
embodiment of action patterns historically constructed and currently deemed morally acceptable. The
justifiable terror consideration of the consequences of such decomposition induces constitutes a major
impediment to the pursuit of redemptive change - constitutes a formidable barrier to intrapsychic
integration.
The shamanic "process of transformation" appears as the means by which cognitive systems are
updated, when necessary; the affect that is released, during the process, is necessarily part of the
experience. Every major "step forward" therefore has some of the aspect of the revolutionary "descent into
madness"; change shades qualitatively from the normal to the radical. The structure of this process
formulates itself easily into imagistic representation - even among children, far too young to develop any
"explicitly statable" knowledge about such occurences.
The following dream was described by my daughter, Mikhaila (three years nine months old), about my
son, Julian (one year eleven months old) (October 5, 1995). Julian was in the process of toilet training and
rapid speech development, and was having some trouble controlling his emotions. Mikhaila liked to call
him "baby." We had several discussions about the fact that he really wasn't a baby anymore. She told me
this story, while I was at the computer, so I was able to get it verbatim:
Mikhaila: Julian's eyes falled out
and then
he falled into pieces
Dad: (what sort of pieces?)
Mikhaila: Julian pieces
and the bones falled out too
then
a hole got him
and there was water in it
and when he came out he was big
Mom: (Julian isn't a baby anymore?)
Mikhaila: No he's a big boy
and a bug with legs got him out
'cause bugs can swim
and the hole was in the park
and it moved into the back yard
and he falled in it
a tree burned
and left the hole.
It was the partial "dissolution" of Julian's previous infantile personality that was causing his emotional
distress. Mikhaila, upset by his trouble (and curious about the disappearance of "her baby") was trying to
understand what her brother was going through. Her dream represented his transformation as a "death" and
rebirth: First his eyes fell out, then he fell into pieces, then his bones came out. Everything went into a
"hole," which originally inhabited the nearby park. (The park by our house is 40 wooded acres; the children
219 







and I had gone in there at night, several times. They found it spooky, but exciting. For them, it was the
nearest manifestation of the unknown, outside explored and familiar territory - prime locale for metaphoric
application as source of the "hole," in which transformation takes place). The hole was full of water, whose
symbolism we have partially discussed (as the rejuvenating/destroying "water of life"). The "bug with legs"
that could "swim" was, I think, a theriomorphized representation of the very archaic intrapsychic systems
that guide or underly the transformation of more sophisticated cortical or personality structures. The notion
that a "tree" burned, and left the hole, is very complex. A tree, at minimum, is a complex structure that
emerges from basic material (from the "ground"). It is also commonly used as a metaphoric representative
of the "essence" of the individual human - even of the nervous system itself.428 The "tree" in this case was
therefore also representative of Julian, but in a more impersonal way. It "stood for," among other things,
the personality structures that were currently undergoing transformation.
Adaptive ability remains necessarily limited to the domain encompassed by a single set of principles - a
single pattern of action, a single mode of apprehension - in the absence of capacity to reconfigure present
conceptualizations of morality (morality: description of unbearable present, ideal future, and means of
transformation). Such limitation - which is the inability to play games with the rules of the games - means
dangerous restriction of behavioral and representational flexibility, and increased susceptibility to the
dangers posed by inevitable "environmental" shift (that is, by inevitable re-emergence of the dragon of the
unknown). Biologically-determined capacity for such dissolution - and for its satisfactory resolution -
provides the necessary precondition for the existence of human capacity for qualitative alteration in
adaptation. Resolution of crisis - symbolic rebirth - follows attendant upon initiatory dissolution,
dismemberment and death. Eliade states:
".. the initiatory operations proper always include the renewal of the organs and viscera, the cleaning of
the bones, and the insertion of magical substances - quartz crystals, or pearl shell, or "spirit snakes."
Quartz is connected with the "sky world and with the rainbow"; pearl shell is similarly connected with
the "rainbow serpent," that is, in sum, still with the sky. This sky symbolism goes along with ecstatic
ascents to Heaven; for in many regions the candidate is believed to visit the sky, whether by his own
power (for example, by climbing a rope) or carried by a snake. In the sky he converses with the
Supernatural Beings and mythical Heroes. Other initiations involve a descent to the realm of the dead;
for example, the future medicine man goes to sleep by the burying ground, or enters a cave, or is
transported underground or to the bottom of a lake. Among some tribes, the initiation also includes the
novice's being "roasted" in or at a fire. Finally, the candidate is resuscitated by the same Supernatural
Beings who had killed him, and he is now "a man of Power." During and after his initiation he meets
with spirits, Heroes of the mythical Times, and souls of the dead - and in a certain sense they all instruct
him in the secrets of the medicine man's profession. Naturally, the training proper is concluded under
the direction of the older masters. In short, the candidate becomes a medicine man through a ritual of
initiatory death, followed by a resurrection to a new and superhuman condition."429
The shaman travels up and down the axis mundi, the central pole of the world, the tree of life connecting
the lower, chthonic reptilian and the upper, celestial avian worlds with the central domain of man. This is
the "constituent elements of experience" conceived in an alternative but familiar arrangement, as heaven
above (father above), underworld/matter/earth below (mother below) - conceived in the configuration
arranged originally by the cosmos-creating hero. The shaman's success at completing the journey "from
earth to the domain of the gods" allows him to serve the role of psychopomp, intermediary between man
and god; to aid the members of his community in adjusting to what remains outside of conditional
adaptation, when such adaptation fails. The shaman therefore serves his society as active intermediary with
the unknown; as the conduit, so to speak, through which the unknown speaks to man; as the agent through
which the information which compels adaptive change flows. It is important to note that the shaman's
journey into "unknown lands" must be bounded by return to the community for the voyage to be of value.
Otherwise, the prototypal ecstatic experience - central to the shamanic vocation (and to creative thought
and action in general) - is mere insanity; will be regarded socially and experienced intrapsychically as
such. Resolution is psychological reconstruction, reincorporation, rebirth "on a higher level" - with
redemptive personal experience intact, but reintegrated in the corpus of current sociocultural myth and
history.
220 











The ineradicable anomaly that comprises an eternal aspect of existence periodically undermines the
stability - the sanity - of a subset of unfortunate but gifted individuals. Those who maintain their heads
during the "journey into the underworld" return - contaminated by that underworld, from the perspective of
their compatriots - with possibilities for re-ordering the world and, therefore, for maintaining sanity and
stable life. Such recovery is in essence the transformation of assumption and value - individual, then
cultural. History is an invaluable storehouse of the creative experience and wisdom of the past. Past
wisdom is not always sufficient to render present potentiality habitable. If the structure of experience itself
was static and finite, like the past, all things would have been conquered long ago, and the lives of the
ancestors and their children would differ little in kind. But the structure of experience is dynamic and
infinite in possibility. The nature of experience itself varies with time. New challenges and dangers appear
out of the future, into the present, where none existed before. History, as description of the past, is
incomplete, as well as static. It must therefore exist in constant conflict with new experiences. The spirit
underlying the transmutation of culture resolves unbearable intrapsychic conflict with shattering revelation,
first to the individual, then to society at large. The creative individual "dies" - metaphysically and, too
often, literally - for those who follow him, instead of sharing the common destiny of his peers. Those who
bear the initial burden for the forward movement of history are capable of transforming personal
idiosyncrasy and revelation into collective reality, without breaking down under the weight of isolation and
fear. Such creativity is feared and hated and desired and worshipped by every human individual and by
human society in general. Creative individuals destroy old values, and threaten with chaos - but also bear
light, and the promise of better things. It is in this manner that the "sacrifice of the revolutionary savior"
redeems and rekindles the cosmos.
The revolutionary hero is the individual who decides voluntarily, courageously, to face some aspect of
the still-unknown and threatening. He may also be the only person who is presently capable of perceiving
that social adaptation is incompletely or improperly structured, in a particular way - who presently
understands that there still remain unconquered evil spirits, dangerous unknowns and threatening
possibilities. In taking creative action, he (re)encounters chaos, generates new myth-predicated behavioral
strategies, and extends the boundaries (or transforms the paradigmatic structure) of cultural competence.
The well-adapted man identifies with what has been, conserves past wisdom, and is therefore protected
from the unknown. The hero, by contrast, author and editor of history, masters the known, exceeds its
bounds, and then subjects it to restructuring - exposing chaos once more to view in the process - or pushes
back unknown frontiers, establishing defined territory where nothing but fear and hope existed before. The
hero overcomes nature, the Great Mother, entering into creative union with her; reorganizing culture, the
Great Father, in consequence. Such reintegration and resurrection is in essence the metamorphosis of
individual - and then cultural - moral presumption. Cumulative socially-mediated transmission of the past
consequences of such creation and intrapsychic reorganization constitutes group identity, culture itself, the
canon of assumptions and values that underlie behavior, the eternal shield against the terrible unknown.
The hero is the first person to have his "internal structure" (that is, his hierarchy of values and his
behaviors) reorganized as a consequence of contact with an emergent anomaly. His "descent into the
underworld" and subsequent reorganization makes him a savior - but his contact with the dragon of chaos
also contaminates him with the forces that disrupt tradition and stability. The reigning "status-quo" stability
may be only apparent - that is, the culture in its present form may already be doomed by as-of-yet not fully
manifested change. The hero detects the dragon, or at least admits to its presence, before anyone else, and
leads the charge. His return to the kingdom of threatened order may hardly be accompanied by praise,
however, since the information he now carries (or perhaps is) will appear disruptive and destructive long
before it proves redemptive. It is very easy to view the hero as the most profound danger to the state, in
consequence - and this would in fact be true if the absolute stasis of the state did not constitute a more
fundamental danger. Figure 51: The Crucified Redeemer as Dragon of Chaos and Transformation 430
presents the savior as serpent, in keeping with his "contamination" by the unknown.431
221 
Figure 51: The Crucified Redeemer as Dragon of Chaos and Transformation

Figure 52: The Socially Destructive and Redemptive "Journey" of the Revolutionary Hero
schematically presents the "way of the savior." The individual troubled by anomalous and anxietyprovoking
experiential data is suffering equally from the "disintegration," "rigidity" or "senility" of the
society within. The choice to "process" such data - that is, to "mine" it for significance, and to destabilize
the socially-constructed intrapsychic hierarchy of behavior and values, in consequence - is equivalent,
mythologically speaking, to the "descent to the underworld." If this descent is successful - that is, if the
exploring individual does not retreat to his previous personality structure, and wall himself in, and if he
does not fall prey to hopelessness, anxiety and despair - then he may "return" to the community, treasure in
hand, with processed information whose incorporation would benefit the remaining members of society. It
is very likely, however, that he will be viewed with fear and even hatred, as a consequence of his
"contamination with the unknown" - particularly if those "left behind" are "unconscious" of the threat that
motivated his original journey. His contamination is nothing to be taken lightly, besides. If the exploratory
figure has in fact derived a new mode of adaptation or representation, necessary for the continued success
and survival of the group, substantial social change is inevitable. This process of change will throw those
completely identified with the group into the realm of chaos, against their will. Such an "involuntary
descent into the underworld" is a very dangerous undertaking, as we have seen - particularly in the absence
of "identification with the hero." This means that it is primarily those persons who have "sold their soul to
the group" who cannot distinguish between the hero and the dragon of chaos (between the hero and the
environmental disaster, the death of the king, the dangerous stranger, or the heretical idea).

Figure 52: The Socially Destructive and Redemptive "Journey" of the Revolutionary Hero
223 








The more tyrannical the attitude, the more those who hold it hate and fear the hero, victim and
beneficiary of the creative illness:
Let us lie in wait for the righteous man, because he is inconvenient to us and opposes our actions; he
reproaches us for sins against the law, and accuses us of sins against our training.
He professes to have knowledge of God, and calls himself a child of the Lord.
Let us see if his words are true, and let us test what will happen at the end of his life; for if the righteous

man is God's son, he will help him, and will deliver him from the hand of his adversaries.
Let us test him with insult and torture, that we may find out how gentle he is, and make trial of his
forbearance.
Let us condemn him to a shameful death, for, according to what he says, he will be protected. (Wisdom

2:12-13, 16-20)
The tyrannical attitude maintains society in homogeneity, and rigid predictability, but dooms it to eventual
collapse. This arrogant traditionalism, masquerading as moral virtue, is merely unexpressed fear of leaving
the beaten path, of forging the new trail - the entirely comprehensible but nonetheless unforgivable
shrinking from destiny, as a consequence of lack of faith in personal ability and precisely equivalent fear of
the unknown. The inevitable result of such failure is restriction of meaning - by definition, as meaning
exists on the border between the known and the unknown. Repression of personal experience - which is
failure to update action and representation in the face of an anomalous occurrence - means damming up the
river of life; means existence on the barren plain, in the paralyzed kingdom, in the eternal drought. It is
personal experience, anathema to the fascist, eternally superseding group categorization and the
interpretations of the dead - personal experience that is novel and endlessly refreshing.
The security of predictable society provides an antidote to fear, but a too-rigid society ensures its own
eventual destruction. The future brings with it the unknown; inflexibility and unwillingness to change
therefore bring the certainty of extinction. Adaptive behavior is created and/or transformed by those driven
to resolve the tension inevitably existing between dynamic personal experience and society - driven to
resolve the tension between what they know to be true and what history claims. Re-adaptation, during times
of crisis, does not necessarily constitute simple addition to the body of historical knowledge - although that
is heroic endeavor as well. Full readaptation may necessitate revolutionary measures, partial or complete
reincarnation - dissolution to constituent elements, and systemic reorganization. Such reorganization alters
the meaning of experience, and therefore, the mythology of history and being. If resolution is not reached
in time of crisis, mental illness (for the individual) or cultural degeneration (for the society) threatens. This
"mental illness" (failure of culture, failure of heroism) is return to domination by the unknown - in
mythological terms, expressed as involuntary incest (destructive union) with the Terrible Mother.
The revolutionary hero opens himself up to the possibility of advancement - to furtherance of his
culture's central myth - by placing himself beyond the protective enclave of history and by exposing his
vulnerability to the terrible nature of reality. In psychological terms: the hero discovers the limitations of
history; discovers the nakedness of the father (Genesis 9:20-25). He must, therefore, challenge history, and
face what it had previously protected him from. Contact with the Terrible Mother means exposure to
absolute mortal vulnerability - to the existence and consequences of ignorance, insanity, cruelty, disease,
and death. The revolutionary hero faces the reality of his vulnerability, and fights a battle with the terror
thereby generated.
The constant transcendence of the future continually serves to destroy the absolute sufficiency of all
previous historically-determined systems, and ensures that the path defined by the revolutionary hero
remains the one constant road to redemption. The "revolutionary hero" is embodiment and narrative
representation of the action of consciousness itself. This mythically masculine principle emerges from its
identity with chaos and culture, and stands as an independently divine phenomenon, equivalent in potential
strength to the destructive, generative, protective and tyrannical forces that make up human experience. The
hero is the individual who has found the "third solution" to his existential problems - found the alternative
to decadence and authoritarianism. When faced with a paradox whose solution is impossible in terms of the
historical canon (that established axiomatically-predicated hierarchy of values and assumptions) he takes
inspired action and transcends his culturally-determined limitations. Instead of denying the existence of the
224 





problem - and, therefore, tormenting those who cannot help but posit it - the revolutionary hero accepts the
(apparently) impossible task of solution, and of reuniting the warring opposites. He admits the possibility of
successful solution, not because the problem can be minimized - but because he believes human nature can
expand to meet it. Such belief - faith - provides the precondition for courage. His act of voluntary
transcendence re-exposes him to the brute force of the unknown (and to the anger of the social group), but
enables creative action. The hero's ability to risk standing alone - neither rejecting his culture because he is
ignorant of its value, nor running away from it in panic because of fear - offers him the possibility of
attaining true stature, although not necessarily acclaim or popularity.
The true absolute in the individual, which can meet the absolute unknown, is the heroic aspect, which
cannot be made finally subject to tyranny and is not ruled by the past. This is the spirit that created
civilization, which must not be bound, within the individual, by abject subjugation to what has already
been. The man who stands outside of culture, necessarily, places himself against nature and the world. This
seems a hopeless position. But man knows little of his true potential - and in that ignorance lies his hope:
This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. (Acts
4:11).
4.3. The Rise of Self-Reference, and the Permanent Contamination of Anomaly with
Death
The appearance of anomaly can be less or more upsetting. Small "manifestations of the unknown" disrupt
relatively small tracts of "explored territory." Larger manifestations may disrupt all things previously
taken for granted - even things "invisible."
Upsetting manifestations of the unknown may occur as a consequence of "outside forces," geological,
meteorological - even cosmological. Similarly, social transformations may upset the stable and familiar.
Wars, revolutions, and migrations make the conditional nature of everything taken for granted evident once
more.
Internal transformations are just as likely to introduce instability. The process of maturation, in and of
itself, is sufficient to disrupt the previously stable and well-adapted personality - and the little society of
the family. "Crises" in adaptation may be brought about in childhood, at the onset of schooling and first
independent contact with the unmediated social world. The hormonal changes and new social demands of
youth may likewise transform the happy and reasonable child into the depressed and hostile adolescent.
Some "internal" transformations are also natural and social events. The ever-expanding human
capacity for abstract thinking, for example, appears to be a consequence of biological and social forces,
working synergistically. The human brain has evolved exceptionally quickly, from the phylogenetic
perspective. The language-mediated interpersonal interaction characteristic of ever-larger human societies
has provided that rapidly developing biological capacity with "data" whose sophistication and breadth is
increasing exponentially. This means that the human mind increasingly manifests the capacity to upset
itself - to produce revelations, so to speak, that knock gaping holes in the previously-sufficient adaptive
and protective social and intrapsychic structures.
The ever-expanding human capacity for abstraction has enabled us - as a species, and as individuals -
to produce self-models that include the temporal boundaries of existence. We have become able to imagine
our own deaths, and the deaths of those we love, and to make a link between mortal fragility and every risk
we encounter. Emergence of such capacity - which re-occurs with the maturation of every new human
being - introduces the most intractable anomaly imaginable into the developmental course of every life.
Myth represents the ever-recurring appearance of this representational ability - this emergent "selfconsciousness,"
the heritable sin of Adam - as incorporation of the "forbidden fruit," development of
knowledge of good and evil, and consequent expulsion from paradise. This appearance is an event of
"cosmic significance," driving the separation of heaven and earth, making human experience something
"eternally fallen," something ever in need of redemption.
The unknown has become permanently contaminated with death, for Homo sapiens. This contamination
has tremendously heightened our general motivation - that is, our fear and curiosity - as we are able to
225 




perceive the potentially mortal consequences of every anomalous event. Our cultural creations - our great
societies, and the beliefs that accompany them - can be profitably viewed as driven by our knowledge of
mortality, and by the energy (the heightened alertness and penetrating consciousness) such knowledge
inspires.
Our great transpersonal cognitive power, however, has not yet rescued us from the valley of the shadow
of death.
"What man is found such an idiot as to suppose that God planted trees in Paradise, in Eden, like a
husbandman, and planted therein the tree of Life, perceptible to the eyes and sense, which gave life to the
eater thereof; and another tree which gave to the eater thereof a knowledge of good and evil? I believe that
every man must hold these things for images, under which the hidden sense lies concealed."432
The meta-mythology of the Way portrays the manner in which specific ideas about the present, the future,
and the mode of transforming one into the other are initially constructed, and then reconstructed in their
entirety, when such transformation becomes necessary. This meta-myth provides the deep structure linking
other classes of myths, including those describing the current or pre-existent stable state, those that portray
the emergence of something unexpected into that state, those that represent the dissolution of paradise, in
consequence, and those that describe the regeneration of stability. This cyclic pattern is essentially
characteristic of the development of consciousness, of the capacity to act and represent - which is regarded
from the mythic perspective as akin to the creation of the world.
The "previous place of stability," destroyed as a consequence of emergent anomaly, may be
apprehended either as "the paradise that once reigned," from the perspective of the chaos engendered by its
collapse, or as "the rigid and tyrannical past," from the perspective of revitalized and renewed order. Myths
of paradise and the fall typically describe the first dynamic elements of the way from the perspective of
"the chaos presently reigning" - that is, from the position of the uncertainty and fear that characterizes
"profane" and "worldly" life. From this standpoint, human life is existence in the "valley of the shadow of
death," contaminated by the unbearable and unreturnable gift of the knowledge of good and evil. Myths of
redemption - that is, of the ascent from chaos, of the return to paradise, or of the "flight" to heaven - are
tales "designed" to describe the process of remediation for the "prehistoric" fall. Such myths lay out a
morality whose incorporation or incarnation constitutes cure for the spiritual paralysis engendered by
emergent knowledge of death.
The idea of primeval paradise, then paradise lost - of the origin of experience, the rise of
(self)consciousness, then permanent, heritable fall, descent from grace - appears as a constant predicate of
human culture, distributed throughout the world. Even the most technologically primitive of people, whose
styles of existence were often mistaken for paradisal by the Europeans who first encountered them,
generally considered themselves fallen from an earlier condition of perfection. For them - like "us" - the
noble savage was an ancestral Adamic figure, who could communicate directly with God:
"When Heaven had been abruptly separated from the earth, that is, when it had become remote, as in
our days; when the tree or liana connecting Earth to Heaven had been cut; or the mountain which used to
touch the sky had been flattened out - then the paradisiac stage was over, and man entered into his
present condition. In effect, all [myths of paradise] show us primordial man enjoying a beatitude, a
spontaneity and freedom, which he has unfortunately lost in consequence of the fall - that is, of what
followed upon the mythical event that caused the rupture between Heaven and Earth."433
The idea of paradise encompasses somewhat more than the "previous place of stability." It is actually all
previous places of stability, concatenated into a single representation. Every previous place of stability
becomes in this manner order, as such, balanced perfectly with potential - becomes existence without
suffering, in Eden or Paradise, in the "walled garden of delight" ("... Eden, signifies in Hebrew "delight, a
place of delight" ... our own English word Paradise, which is from the Persian, pairi - "around," daeza -
"a wall," means properly a walled enclosure. Apparently, then, Eden is a walled garden of delight..." 434).
Paradise is the place where the perfect harmony of order and chaos eliminates suffering, while bringing
226 



forth the necessities and pleasures of life - without work or effort. Chaos and order are integrated,
perfectly, in the paradisal state.
Paradise therefore also partakes of the state of the "cosmos" before its division into the ever-warring
constituent elements of experience. This uroboric condition or state, conceptualized as a mode of being that
is free from or beyond opposition, is also by necessity that place or state of being where suffering - a
consequence of limitation and opposition - does not exist. This form of symbolic representation seems
somewhat paradoxical, as it is the "dragon of chaos" that generates dread anxiety, when it manifests itself
unexpectedly. However, context determines salience - determines meaning - in mythology as elsewhere.
The conditions of existence - that is, the balance obtained by the forces of order, chaos and consciousness -
not infrequently appear as intolerable, in and of themselves (in the state of anxiety and pain characterized
by severe grief or depression, for example). From this perspective, the state of non-being (equivalent to
"identity with precosmogonic chaos") is the absence of all possibility of suffering. In the state of ideation
characterizing suicide, for example, the Great Mother beckons. A student of mine, who had undergone a
relatively severe "crisis of identity," told me the following story:
I took a trip to the ocean. There were cliffs behind the beach. I was standing on one of the cliffs, looking
out over the water. I was in a depressed state of mind. I looked out to the horizon. I could see the figure
of a beautiful woman in the clouds. She gestured for me to come forward. I almost went over the edge,
before I came out of my fantasy.
My wife told me a very similar tale. When she was in late adolescence, feeling somewhat unsettled, she
took a camping trip on the sides of a deep river bank near her hometown. She stayed overnight on a bluff
overlooking a steep drop. In the morning, the fog came off the river, and filled the valley. She walked to the
edge, when she woke up:
I saw the clouds below me. They looked like a big, soft pillow. I imagined diving in, where it was warm
and comfortable. But part of me knew better.
The state of non-existence - the state before the opening of Pandora's box - can under many conditions
appear a state worth (re)attaining.
The common metaphor of Paradise as geographic place serves to concretize a complex state of affairs,
whose intrinsic nature would otherwise remain entirely beyond grasp - serves to bring down to earth, so to
speak, the a priori conditions of the spirit, and render them initially comprehensible, at least in the
symbolic sense. Paradise as place or state is perfected interpersonal interaction - the harmony of the lion
and the lamb - as well as spiritual harmony (is the "internal kingdom" and the "external kingdom"
simultaneously united as the "kingdom of God"). Paradise is also the world, before it has become profane -
before innocence is lost.
Myths of "the paradise of childhood" use the circumstances applying at the dawn of each individual life
- prior to separation of mother and child - as metaphor for the "place of beginnings." The symbiotic
mother-child relationship comprises the union of elements that will in time become separate, and may
therefore be utilized as grist for the symbolic mill. The intimate union of two individuals at the beginning
of each life, after birth comprises "a state" that is one thing, and more than one thing, simultaneously. This
concrete example of a unity that is at the same time a plurality can be used in abstraction, to represent the
hypothetical pretemporal state itself, where everything that would be more than one thing still "existed" in
inseparable identity. This unity - the unviolated original state - tends to take on the affective evaluation of
perfection (since it is the place where there is no conflict, no "separation of opposites").
Widespread iconic representations of the Holy Virgin Mother and Child, for example - Christian and
non-Christian - might be regarded as crystallized fantasies about the affective nature of the origin. In the
ideal mother-infant union, every desire remains absolutely bounded by love. The state of early childhood,
more generally, symbolizes freedom from conflict; symbolizes honest, innocent, idyllic human existence,
immersion in love, life before the necessary corruption of social contact, life preceding exposure to the
harshly punitive conditions of physical existence. Childhood represents (perhaps, is) existence prior to the
discovery of mortality, prior to apprehension of the temporal limits of subjective being - represents,
therefore, existence without contamination by knowledge of death. This "lack of contamination" lends
227 





childhood experience an ideal quality, which easily comes to serve the mythic imagination as model for the
state of being that transcends the existential anxiety of adulthood. The child, father to the man, represents
the past of man; additionally, represents human potential, and man's eternal hope for the future. The
Hasidim believe, for example, that "the Zaddik [the perfect, righteous man] finds that which has been lost
since birth, and restores it to man."435 In the Christian tradition, likewise, it is held that "except ye be
converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven" (Matthew 3:3).
Maturation means expansion of ability, differentiation of self and world, transformation of possibility into
actuality, but loss of potential as well, as anything developed develops in one direction, and not in any of
the innumerable alternates. Growth therefore also means decline, as each step towards adulthood is one step
closer to death.
The initial paradisal state is typically disrupted, in mythological representation, by some fateful act
undertaken by man - by some act that places him in opposition to his heavenly source. Such opposition is
painful, and is often portrayed as a dreadful mistake or sin. It is nonetheless the case that the origin of
experience and history - that is, the origin of being itself - appears inextricably bound up with such
opposition, with differentiation from the origin. The initial paradisal state, although characterized by
absolute totality, nonetheless seems paradoxically flawed; suffers from an indeterminate form of nonexistence
- lacks reality itself:
"There was something formless, yet complete, that existed before Heaven and Earth;
Without sound, without substance,
dependent on nothing, unchanging, all-pervading, unfailing.
One may think of it as the Mother of all things under Heaven."436
Such non-existence appears as an inevitable consequence of the absence of limitation, or of opposition.
This absence deprives whatever constitutes the origin of a point of reference, distinguishable from itself -
and, therefore, deprives it of existence. As a "place" (as the "previous state of innocent being"), Paradise
retains a patina of carefree existence. This is diminished by the comparative unreality of that existence.
Things have not yet fallen apart in the Garden of Eden - have not yet separated (completely) into their
constituent elements. Two things that cannot be discerned from one another are not two things, however,
and one thing with no discernible features whatsoever may not even be.
Paradise is the world, before it has become realized. In such a state, nothing suffers, and nothing dies,
because there is no defined one to suffer, no one aware of either the nature of subjective being, or the
meaning of such being, once it has become "detached" from the whole. The "primordial ancestor,"
simultaneously male and female, dwells in this unrealized place, prior to division into husband and wife;
437
exists, unselfconsciously, even after that division:
And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. (Genesis 2:25).
To "know" nakedness - and to be shamed by it - is to understand exposure, weakness and vulnerability. To
be exposed before a crowd and the world is to have the essential frailty of individual being dramatically
and incontrovertibly demonstrated. To be unaware of nakedness - to lack "self-consciousness" - is to be
much less troubled, but also - to be much less. The "paradisal" world of the child is much less -much less
manifest, that is - than the world of the adult. The child has fewer responsibilities, and fewer defined
concerns, than the adult. This lends childhood a glamour that mature existence lacks - at least from a
certain adult perspective. But it is also the case that the child has a terrible vulnerability, which the adult
has transcended. The child does not explicitly perceive his vulnerability, and therefore does not suffer, until
that vulnerability tragically manifests itself. The adult, by contrast, knows he can be hurt, and suffers
constantly for that knowledge. His "heightened consciousness" - self-consciousness, really - means that he
can take steps to insure his healthy survival, however (even though he must in consequence worry for the
future). The world of the child is circumscribed, incompletely realized, but nonetheless vulnerable. The
paradisal world is incomplete, yet threatened, in the same manner.
It is primordial separation of light from darkness - engendered by Logos, the Word, equivalent to the
process of consciousness - that initiates human experience and historical activity, which is reality itself, for
all intents and purposes. This initial division provides the prototypic structure, and the fundamental
228 

precondition, for the elaboration and description of more differentiated attracting and repulsing pairs of
opposites:
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of
God moved upon the face of the waters.
And God said, Let there be light; and there was light.
And God saw the light, that it was good; and God divided the light from the darkness. (Genesis 1:1-4).
Light and darkness constitute mythic totality; order and chaos, in paradoxical union, provide primordial
elements of the entire experiential universe. Light is illumination, inspiration; darkness, ignorance and
degeneration. Light is the newly risen sun, the eternal victor of the endless cyclical battle with the serpent
of the night; is the savior, the mythic hero, the deliverer of humanity. Light is gold, the king of metals,
pure, and incorruptible, a symbol for civilized value itself. Light is Apollo, the sun-king, god of
enlightenment, clarity and focus; spirit, opposed to black matter; bright masculinity, opposed to the dark
and unconscious feminine. Light is Marduk, the Babylonian hero, god of the morning and spring day, who
struggles against Tiamat, monstrous goddess of death and the night; is Horus, who fights against evil, and
redeems the father; is Christ, who transcends the past, and extends to all individuals identity with the divine
Logos. To exist in the light means to be born, to live, to be redeemed, while to depart from the light means
to choose the path of evil - to choose spiritual death - or to perish bodily altogether.
Myth equates the origin of the universe of experience with the partition of light from darkness because
of the analogical or metaphorical identity between that separation and the mysterious differentiation of
conscious experience from unconscious non-awareness. Awareness and daytime experience are
inextricably united, like oblivion and the night. Darkness places severe uncontrollable external
transpersonal limitations upon waking human awareness, by eliminating or dramatically restricting visually
dependent temporal and spatial sensory extension. The blackness of the night brings with it the reemergence
of the unknown, and the eternal human sense of subjugation to those terrors still
incomprehensibly embedded in experience:
"When sacred Night sweeps heavenward, she takes
the glad, the winsome day, and folding it,
rolls up its golden carpet that had been
spread over an abysmal pit.
Gone vision-like is the external world,
and man, a homeless orphan, has to face,
in utter helplessness, naked, alone,
the blackness of immeasurable space.
Upon himself he has to lean; with mind
abolished, thought unfathered, in the dim
depths of his soul he sinks, for nothing comes
from outside to support or limit him.
All life and brightness seem an ancient dream -
while in the substance of the night,
unravelled, alien, he now perceives
a fateful something that is his by right."438
External "cosmic" forces veil the day with the night. Similarly, and as a consequence of equally
uncontrollable and impersonal "internal" forces, consciousness vanishes, into sleep, in the night: 439
"... the central metaphor underlying 'beginning' is not really birth at all. It is rather the moment of
waking from sleep, when one world disappears and another comes into being. This is still contained
within a cycle: we know that at the end of the day we shall return to the world of sleep, but in the
meantime there is a sense of self-transcendence, of a consciousness getting 'up' from an unreal into a
real, or at least more real, world. This sense of awakening into a greater degree of reality is expressed by
229 




Heraclitus... as a passing from a world where everyone has his own 'logos' into a world where there is a
common 'logos.' Genesis presents the Creation as a sudden coming into being of a world through
articulate speech (another aspect of logos), conscious perception, light and stability. Something like this
metaphor of awakening may be the real reason for the emphasis on 'days,' and such recurring phrases as
'And the evening and the morning were the first day,' even before the day as we know it was established
with the creating of the sun."440
The temporary nocturnal state of nonexistence appears similar to the more permanent situation theoretically
prevailing prior (?) to the dawn of awareness as such, where there was no subject, no object, and no
experience at all - but where the possibility of such things somehow lay dormant.
There is no suffering, in the Garden of Eden. In such a state things do not really exist. In consequence,
myth appears to have equated the establishment of the opposition necessary to being with the appearance
and evolution of the limited subject - who serves creation as the mirror of God. In the mythic world, the
very existence of experience - past, present and future - appears dependent upon experience of the spatially
and temporally limited observer. Restricted in their manifestation in this manner - that is, manifest in the
domain of individual experience - things attain a brief, differentiated existence, before they crash into their
opposites, and vanish forever. An ancient midrash states, in this vein, that "God and man are in a sense
twins.441 The modern physicist John Wheeler states, analogously:
"In every elementary quantum process the act of observation, or the act of registration, or the act of
observer-participancy, or whatever we choose to call it, plays an essential part in giving 'tangible
reality' to that which we say is happening. [Paradoxically]: The universe exists 'out there' independent
of acts of registration, but the universe does not exist out there independent of acts of registration."442
From the standard perspective, objective things exist, in and of themselves. But this viewpoint eliminates
the necessity of the observer, who gives to all things a necessary vantage point - who reduces indefinable
virtuality to extant actuality. Myth makes no such mistake, equating the very presence of being and
becoming with the emergence of consciousness and self-consciousness. 443 It is this equation that allows the
mythic imagination to place man at the center of the universe, and to draw an analogy between the principle
that makes order out of chaos, and the individual himself.
The mythic world - the world, as it is experienced - might in fact be considered an emergent property of
first-order self-reference; might be regarded as the interaction between the universe as subject, and the
universe as object. Myth equates the origin with the dawning of light, with the emergence of consciousness:
equates the universe with the world of experience; assumes that the real presupposes the subjective. This
idea seems exceedingly foreign to modern sensibility, which is predicated upon the historically novel
proposition that the objective material in and of itself constitutes the real, and that subjective experience,
which in fact provides source material for the concept of the object, is merely an epiphenomenal
appendage. However, it is the case that self-referential systems (like that consisting of being as subject and
object, simultaneously) are characterized by the emergence of unexpected and qualitatively unique
properties. The world as subject (that is, the individual) is an exceedingly complex phenomena - more
complex, by far, than anything else (excepting other subjects). The world as object is hardly less
mysterious. It is reasonable to regard the interaction of the two as something even more remarkable. We
think: matter first, then subject - and presume that matter, as we understand it, is that which exists in the
absence of our understanding. But the "primal matter" of mythology (a more comprehensive "substance"
than the matter of the modern world) is much more than mere substance: it is the source of everything,
objective and subjective (is matter and spirit, united in essence). From this perspective, consciousness is
fundamental to the world of experience - as fundamental as "things" themselves. The matter of mythology
therefore seems more than "superstition, that must be transcended" - seems more than the dead stuff of the
modern viewpoint.
The world of experience appears generated by the actions of consciousness - by dawning awareness - in
more than one "stage." The "purely conscious awareness" which hypothetically exists prior to the
generation of active representations of the self - that is, the mere division of "object" and "subject" - still
retains essential unity and associated "paradisal" elements. Adam and Eve exist as independent beings,
230 




prior to their "fall," but still commune with the animals, and walk with God. Sheltered in an eternally
productive garden, blissfully ignorant of their essential nakedness and vulnerability, they exist without
anxious care or toil. It is the emergence of second-order self-reference - awareness of the self, selfconsciousness
- that finally disrupts this static state of perfection, and irreversibly alters the nature of
experience. (The development of consciousness - the apprehension of the system by "itself" - adds one
form of self-reference to the universal structure. Self-consciousness - the apprehension of the subject by
himself - appears to have added another.) The modern mind would consider nothing fundamental altered
by such "internal" transformation (as it considers consciousness epiphenomenal to reality). The
"mythological mind" adopts another stance entirely, "presuming" as it does that consciousness is allied
with the creator of things. From this viewpoint, cognitive transformations alter the structure of existence as
such; transform the very relationship between heaven and earth, creator and created; permanently alter the
cosmos itself. The modern materialist would consider such a theory arrogant and presumptious, to say the
least. Nonetheless, the great societies of East and West are predicated precisely upon such a viewpoint -
upon myths of the origin and fall of man, characterized by uncanny structural parallel:
The father of Prince Gautama, the Buddha, savior of the Orient, determined to protect his son from
desperate knowledge and tragic awareness, built for him an enclosed pavilion, a walled garden of earthly
delights. Only the healthy, the young, and the happy were allowed access to this earthly paradise. All signs
of decay and degeneration were thus kept hidden from the Prince. Immersed in the immediate pleasures of
the senses, in physical love, in dance, and music, in beauty, and pleasure, Gautama grew to maturity,
protected absolutely from the limitations of mortal being. However, he grew curious, despite his father's
most particular attention and will, and resolved to leave his seductive prison.
Preparations were made, to gild his chosen route, to cover the adventurer's path with flowers, and to
display for his admiration and preoccupation the fairest women of the kingdom. The prince set out, with
full retinue, in the shielded comfort of a chaperoned chariot, and delighted in the panorama previously
prepared for him. The gods, however, decided to disrupt these most carefully laid plans, and sent an aged
man to hobble, in full view, alongside the road. The prince's fascinated gaze fell upon the ancient
interloper. Compelled by curiosity, he asked his attendant:
"What is that creature stumbling, shabby, bent and broken, beside my retinue?"
and the attendant answered:
"That is a man, like other men, who was born an infant, became a child, a youth, a husband, a father, a
father of fathers. He has become old, subject to destruction of his beauty, his will, and the possibilities of
life."
"Like other men, you say?" hesitantly inquired the prince. "That means... this will happen to me?"
 and the attendant answered:
"Inevitably, with the passage of time."
The world collapsed in upon Gautama, and he asked to be returned to the safety of home. In time, his
anxiety lessened, his curiosity grew, and he ventured outside again. This time the gods sent a sick man into
view.
"This creature," he asked his attendant, "shaking and palsied, horribly afflicted, unbearable to behold,
a source of pity and contempt: what is he?"
and the attendant answered:
"That is a man, like other men, who was born whole, but who became ill and sick, unable to cope, a
burden to himself and others, suffering and incurable."
"Like other men, you say? inquired the prince. "This could happen to me?
and the attendant answered:
"No man is exempt from the ravages of disease."
Once again the world collapsed, and Gautama returned to his home. But the delights of his previous life
were ashes in his mouth, and he ventured forth, a third time. The gods, in their mercy, sent him a dead man,
in funeral procession.
"This creature," he asked his attendant, "laying so still, appearing so fearsome, surrounded by grief
and by sorrow, lost and forlorn: what is he?"
and the attendant answered:



"That is a man, like other men, born of woman, beloved and hated, who once was you, and now is the
earth."
"Like other men, you say?" inquired the Prince. "Then... this could happen to me?"
"This is your end," said the attendant, "and the end of all men."
The world collapsed, a final time, and Gautama asked to be returned home. But the attendant had
orders from the prince's father, and took him instead to a festival of women, occurring nearby in a grove in
the woods. The prince was met by a beautiful assemblage, who offered themselves freely to him, without
restraint, in song, and in dance, in play, in the spirit of sensual love. But Gautama could think only of
death, and the inevitable decomposition of beauty, and took no pleasure in the display.

Figure 53: The (Voluntary) Descent of the Buddha
The myth of the Buddha is the story of individual development, considered in the ideal. The story opens
with Gautama's father, shielding his child from the dangers of the world - much as any child in a healthy
family is shielded. As the young prince matures, however, and becomes increasingly curious - he starts to
wonder about the "world beyond." Children who develop within a safe and secure family grow into
individuals who can no longer be contained by that family. It is the "good parent" who "fails," necessarily
- who fosters a child who rapidly becomes so independent that mothering no longer suffices. Each foray
out into the world produces an increase in knowledge, and a commensurate decrease in the ability of the
232 





childhood family constellation and personality to "map the world" - to provide acceptable patterns of
action and representation, for existence as a true individual. The future Buddha's encounter with his
intrinsic mortal limitations destroys his childhood paradise, tragically - but propels him out into the world
as an independent being. This story can be portrayed, in the familiar manner, as in Figure 53: The
(Voluntary) Descent of the Buddha. The story of Gautama's maturation details the consequential
contamination of existence with unbearable anxiety; describes the association, in potential, even of beauty
and the most fundamental and necessary of biological pleasures with the inevitability of decay and of death,
the ultimate punishment. The Buddha's struggle with and eventual victory over his emergent tragic selfconsciousness
comprises the rest of the great tale: first, Gautama incorporates the knowledge of his
ancestors; then, he transcends and restructures that knowledge.
After leaving the "walled garden" of his childhood, Gautama becomes a master of tradition, in his
attempt to make sense of the world of experience, as it now presented itself to him. He develops extensive
knowledge of various philosophies, including Samkhya and Yoga, leaving each in turn as insufficient, and
then takes asceticism - worldly renunciation - to an extreme: "reduced almost to the state of a skeleton, he
finally came to resemble a heap of dust."444 That approach, too, proves insufficient. Finally - having tasted
everything life had to offer, having developed the discipline of a dedicated adherent - he prepares himself
for his final battle. He enters a vast forest (the spiritual home of the unknown), placed himself at the foot of
a pipal tree, and resolves to remain immobile in that place until he attains awakening.
Gautama experiences a true intiatory ordeal in that position, undergoing all the terrors of death (as well
as renewed assault by the temptations of profane life). The discipline he had acquired in his previous
journeys serves him well, however, and he is able to remain single-mindedly devoted to his task - to the
discovery of a truth that would serve life, that would redeem human experience. His final temptation is
perhaps the most interesting. The Buddha attains nirvana, perfection, as a consequence of his ordeal, and is
offered the option of remaining in that state by the God of Death. The offer is rejected: Buddha returns to
the world, accepting his mortal condition, so that he can disseminate the knowledge he has acquired. It is
this latter action that truly marks him as a revolutionary hero. Acquisition of wisdom - the creative
endeavor - is insufficient. The circle of redemptive action is not closed until information hard-won on the
battleground of the individual psyche has been integrated into the larger community. There can be no
salvation for one in the presence of the continued suffering of all. It is Buddha's return from the heaven that
is in his grasp that makes him truly great.
The story of the Buddha is perhaps the greatest "literary" production of the East. It is of great interest to
note, therefore, that its theme also informs the most fundamental levels of Western sensibility. The JudeoChristian
tale of redemption is predicated upon representation of the individual subject, marred with
Original Sin, fallen from grace, conscious of life and the borders of life, irretrievably blessed and cursed
with knowledge of good and evil. The ability to develop such knowledge appears in this story as a
"heritable characteristic of the race," as the precondition for generation of knowledge of the objective
boundaries of subjective existence, as the fundamental precondition of tragic self-awareness:
And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.
Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made. And he said

unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?

And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:
But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it,
neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:

For God doth know that in the day you eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as
gods, knowing good and evil.

And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree
to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband
with her; and he did eat. (Genesis 3:1-6).
Myths dream ideas long before ideas take on recognizable, familiar and verbally comprehensible form.
The myth - like the dream - may be regarded as the birthplace of conscious abstract knowledge, as the
matrix from which formed ideas spring. Every concept, no matter how new or modern it appears, emerges
233 

from ground prepared by centuries of previous intellectual activity. Myth "prepares the ground" for explicit
understanding by using what is presently comprehended - what has been partially explored, what has been
adapted to in action - to represent that which as of yet remains unknown. Objects of experience which have
been investigated can therefore come to serve as symbols of representation for description of the subject of
experience, comparatively difficult to comprehend. It is in this manner that the self, which is essentially
incomprehensible, unknown, gathers metaphoric representations (much as other not-yet-comprehended
phenomena).
Figure 54: The World-Tree as Bridge between "Heaven" and "Hell

234 



Things that are in themselves complex and mysterious in their attributes serve this metaphoric function
most usefully, since their potential for symbolic application is virtually infinite in scope. The tree and the
serpent, for example - complex objects of apprehension - can be understood in part, through direct and
active observation, and can therefore provide productive material for the metaphorical retort. Tree and
serpent, coupled and singly, have an extensive, pervasive, and detailed history as representational agents.
They serve similar functions in a multitude of myths describing the loss of paradise, and must therefore
serve as apt representatives of some process or structure playing a central part in that loss. It appears likely
- despite the initial strangeness of the presumption - that this structure is the nervous system,445 as such
(rather than any individual nervous system), as it manifests itself in intrapsychic representation.446
The tree is the axis mundi, world-tree, grounded immovably in the maternal (or, not infrequently,
"material") world of chaos, with branches reaching to the sky (to heaven, to the realm of the ancestral
spirits). According to the adepts of Hatha Yoga:
"...the feet, firmly placed on the ground, correspond to the roots of the tree, its foundation and source of
nourishment. This might indicate that in daily life you stand firmly on the ground to meet life's
demands. Your head is in space, or heaven [accented in the original]. The word "heaven" in this instance
means in contact with life's energy, with a wisdom beyond the intellect.... The spine is like the trunk of
the tree, along which are located the various Cakras. The top of the head is the crowning blossom of this
flowering tree, the thousand-petalled Lotus of the Sharasrara Cakra."447
The axis mundi stands at the "center of the cosmos," uniting three separate but intertwined "eternal"
realms. The lower kingdom is the domain of the unknown, subterranean, oceanic, hellish - land of reptilian
power, blind force, and eternal darkness. The ancient Scandinavians believed, for example - in keeping
with this general conceptualization - that a great serpent lived underneath Yggdrasill, the world-tree, and
gnawed at its roots, trying forever to destroy it. (Ygrdrasill was constantly revivified, however, by the
springs of "magical water" that also lay underneath it). The great serpent is the dragon of chaos, in his
destructive aspect - the source of all things (including the "world-tree"), as well as the power that reduces
created objects to the conditions of their origin. (The "magical water" is the positive aspect of the unknown,
with its procreative and rejuvenating power). The dyad of tree and serpent comprises an exceedingly
widespread "motif" of mythology, and manifests itself as well as a literary theme. Frye's comments on
Melville's Moby Dick are relevant here. Moby Dick is a great white whale, who lives in the depths of the
sea. Ahab is the captain of a whaling boat, passionately and unreasonably dedicated to finally conquering
that leviathan:
"In Moby Dick, Ahab's quest for the whale may be mad or 'monomaniacal,' as it is frequently called, or
even evil so far as he sacrifices his crew and ship to it, but evil or revenge are not the point of the quest.
The whale itself may be only a 'dumb brute,' as the mate says, and even if it were malignantly
determined to kill Ahab, such an attitude, in a whale hunted to the death, would certainly be
understandable if it were there. What obsesses Ahab is in a dimension of reality much further down than
any whale, in an amoral and alienating world that nothing normal in the human psyche can directly
confront.
The professed quest is to kill Moby Dick, but as the portents of disaster pile up it becomes clear that a
will to identify with (not adjust to) what Conrad calls the destructive element is what is really driving
Ahab. Ahab has, Melville says, become a 'Prometheus,' with a vulture feeding on him. The axis image
appears in the maelstrom or descending spiral ('vortex') of the last few pages, and perhaps in a remark
by one of Ahab's crew: 'The skewer seems loosening out of the middle of the world.' But the descent is
not purely demonic, or simply destructive: like other creative descents, it is partly a quest for wisdom,
however fatal the attaining of such wisdom may be. A relation reminiscent of Lear and the fool develops
at the end between Ahab and the little black cabin boy Pip, who has been left so long to swim in the sea
that he has gone insane. Of him it is said that he has been 'carried down alive to wondrous depths, where
strange shapes of the unwarped primal world glided to and fro... and the miser-merman, Wisdom,
revealed his hoarded heaps.'
235 





Moby Dick is as profound a treatment as modern literature affords of the leviathan symbolism of the
Bible, the titanic-demonic force that raises Egypt and Babylon to greatness and then hurls them into
nothingness; that is both an enemy of God outside the creation and, as notably in Job, a creature within it
of whom God is rather proud. The leviathan is revealed to Job as the ultimate mystery of God's ways,
the 'king over all the children of pride' (Job 41:34), of whom Satan himself is merely an instrument.
What this power looks like depends on how it is approached. Approached by Conrad's Kurtz through his
Antichrist psychosis, it is an unimaginable horror: but it may also be a source of energy that man can put
to his own use. There are naturally considerable risks to doing so: risks that Rimbaud spoke of in his
celebrated lettre du voyant as a 'dereglement de tous les sens.' The phrase indicates the close connection
between the titanic and the demonic that Verlaine expressed in his phrase poete maudit, the attitude of
poets who feel, like Ahab, that the right worship of the powers they invoke is defiance."448
The middle kingdom is earth, mundane conscious existence, domain of man, trapped uncomfortably
between the titanic and the heavenly - trapped in the realm where "spirit and matter" or "heaven and hell"
or "order and chaos" eternally interact and transform. The upper kingdom, finally, is heaven, the
intrapsychic ideal, abstract symbolic construction and utopian state, creation of generations of autonomous
fantasy, following its own rules, governed by its own denizens, with its own non-individual transcendent
existence. The fact that the axis mundi unites earth and heaven means that it may serve ritual purpose as a
bridge between the profane individual domain and the "realm of the gods":
"The symbolism of the ascension into heaven by means of a tree is... clearly illustrated by the ceremony
of initiation of the Buriat shamans. The candidate climbs up a post in the middle of the yourt, reaches
the summit and goes out by the smoke-hole. But we know that this opening, made to let out the smoke,
is likened to the "hole" made by the Pole Star in the vault of Heaven. (Among other peoples, the tentpole
is called the Pillar of the Sky and is compared to the Pole-Star, which is also the hub of the celestial
pavilion, and is named, elsewhere, the Nail of the Sky.) Thus, the ritual post set up in the middle of the
yourt is an image of the Cosmic Tree which is found at the Center of the World, with the Pole Star
shining directly above it. By ascending it, the candidate enters into Heaven; that is why, as soon as he
comes out of the smoke-hole of the tent he gives a loud cry, invoking the help of the gods: up there, he
finds himself in their presence."449
Figure 54: The World-Tree as Bridge between "Heaven" and "Hell" 450 offers a visual interpretation
of the cosmic tree, connecting "heaven, earth and hell." The cosmic tree - Yggdrasill, in this representation
- is grounded in the domain of the dragon of chaos (the "serpent" who "gnaws at its roots"), passes through
"earth," and reaches up into "heaven," the realm of the ancestor/gods. It was "unconscious apprehension"
of this tripartite structure which led Freud, for example, to his "model of the psyche": superego (the gods of
tradition), ego (the world of the individual), and id (the "natural" world of dark instinctive "drive"). It is
Freud's inclusion of all the elements of the world-tree (negative and positive) that has given his mythology
its remarkable strength, influence and power.
Figure 55: The World-Tree and the Constituent Elements of Experience offers another interpretation
and explanation of this tree, relating its "place" in the cosmos to the "constituent elements of experience."
This diagram suffers somewhat from its precise symbolic equation of the tree and the "archetypal son."
Christ and Satan, for example - Christian exemplars of the ambivalent son - may also be viewed as
products of the tree (as well as particular incarnations or forms of the tree, or as phenomena otherwise
inextricably associated with the tree). The world-tree as "forbidden tree of knowledge of good and evil" is,
for example, the cross upon which Christ, the archetypal individual, crucified, suspended and tormented,
manifests for all eternity his identity with God; the tree upon which Odin, Norse savior, is likewise
suspended:
"I ween that I hung
on the windy tree
Hung there for nights full nine
With the spear I was wounded
and offered I was
To Odin, myself to myself

Figure 55: The World-Tree and the Constituent Elements of Experience
The tree is to Christ, therefore, as Christ is to the individual ("I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that
abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing." John
15:5). Satan, by contrast, is something that lurks in the forbidden tree. The (devastating) wisdom he
promises - the knowledge of the gods - is that tree's "first fruit." This makes the world-tree the source of
the revelation that destroys - the source of the anomalous "idea," for example, that disrupts the static past
and plunges it into chaos - as well as the eventual source of the revelation that redeems.
In the book of Genesis, the fruits of the tree of knowledge are ingested in mythic action by the free
(though sorely tempted) act of the individual. The myth uses a particular act, the incorporation of food, as
metaphor for the assimilation of knowledge and ability. Erich Neumann states:
"Wherever liquor, fruit, herbs, etc., appear as the vehicles of life and immortality, including the "water"
and "bread" of life, the sacrament of the Host, and every form of food cult down to the present day, we
have [an] ancient mode of human expression before us. The materialization of psychic contents, by
which contents that we would call "psychic" - like life, immortality, and death - take on material form
in myth and ritual and appear as water, bread, fruit, etc., is a characteristic of the primitive mind....
Conscious realization is "acted out" in the elementary scheme of nutritive assimilation, and the ritual
act of concrete eating is the first form of assimilation known to man....
237 





The assimilation and ingestion of the "content," the eaten food, produces an inner change.
Transformation of the body cells through food intake is the most elementary of animal changes
experienced by man. How a weary, enfeebled, and famished man can turn into an alert, strong, and
satisfied being, or a man perishing of thirst can be refreshed or even transformed by an intoxicating
drink: this is, and must remain, a fundamental experience so long as man shall exist."452
The act of defiant incorporation, initiating alienation from paradise and God, is instigated by the serpent, an
ancient and dangerous creature of base matter, who can shed his skin, and be renewed, reborn.
The snake serves mythology in a dual role, as agent and symbol of transformation, and as prime
representative of fundamental, undifferentiated uroboric power. The Edenic serpent provides the individual
with the knowledge of the gods, without their compensatory power and immortality. His "enlightenment"
of man engenders an unparalleled catastrophe - a catastrophe sufficiently complete to engender not only
the "final division of heaven and earth," but, on that earth, a more-or-less permanent (and unfortunate)
association between the promise of knowledge and the appearance of evil. The Edenic serpent occupies the
same categorical space in the Christian psyche as Lucifer, "bringer of light," spirit of "unbridled
rationality" - in large part because the anomalous idea (the "product of rationality") has the same potential
for destruction as any other natural disaster. This identification is somewhat one-sided, however, as the
anomaly-inspired descent into chaos is only half the mythological story, and can also be viewed as a
necessary precondition for emergence into a "higher state" of consciousness (even for the incarnation of
Christ, the "second fruit of the tree of knowledge"). The medieval alchemists tended to adopt a gnostic
interpretation of the Edenic story, for this reason, as Jung states:
"Hence we get the parallel of the dragon's head with Christ, corresponding to the Gnostic view that the
son of the highest divinity took on the form of the serpent in paradise in order to teach our first parents
the faculty of discrimination, so that they should see that the work of the demiurge [the god who created
the world in the first place] was imperfect."453
The Edenic serpent is, above all, the unknown (power) still lurking "inside" the nervous system, inside the
"world-tree" - is the innate capacity of the mind, its ability to generate revelatory thought, its capacity to
disrupt the stable cosmos and to extend the domain of consciousness. It was "unconscious" (imagistic)
apprehension of this idea that led medieval alchemy to treat the serpent as the "arcane substance" that
transformed itself inside the tree, and to regard the serpent as the tree's "life."454
It is "curiosity that kills the cat" but, equally, curiosity that guides the discovery. The forbidden or
unknown object exists, shrouded in mystery, "outside" the mundane, familiar and explored world. The
command "you can't explore that" inevitably contaminates the forbidden object or situation with mystery:
what could possibly be so dangerous (powerful, interesting) that it must be treated as if it was not there? To
explicitly forbid something contaminates it with the "dragon of chaos" - places a serpent inside it, so to
speak. To explicitly forbid something virtually insures that it will attract attention, at least (as the unknown
inevitably compels approach, as well as fear). The serpent/dragon - chaos/forbidden object connection can
therefore be profitably viewed from a more "physiological" perspective, as well. The snake is regarded as
the regulator of conscious intensity, by the adepts of Kundalini Yoga. This snake is a creature of the spine,
a storehouse of intrapsychic energy, whose activation leads to ecstasy and enlightenment. The goal of
Kundalini Yoga is to "awaken" this serpent, and to thereby reach enlightenment.
The snake shares obvious - and subtle - features with the spine. First is the shape; second is shared
evolutionary history. The human nervous system is composed in part of structures as phylogenetically
ancient as the reptile, in whose recesses lurk tremendous excitatory power. The deep structures of the
brainstem - the "head" of the spinal snake - perform activities upon which maintenance of consciousness
absolutely depends.455 An individual, lost in sleep (in "unconsciousness") can be brought instantaneously
awake and alert by stimulated operation of these structures, in a situation (for example) where something
unexpected and potentially dangerous occurs. A sleeping mother can be brought instantly awake - and
motivated for exploration - by the unexpected cry of her baby, for example. The process of contrast
between desire and current status (between ideal future and present) does not disappear even in sleep. The
unknown brings wakefulness to the sleeping. Threat - more generally, the appearance of the unknown -
238 



propels active exploration, designed to expand adaptive competence (or, terrified cessation of activity) and
produces dramatic heightening of interest and consciousness. This means that consciousness as a
phenomenon depends in large part on activation of the ancient circuitry designed for response to the
unknown. As the human brain evolved, much more "territory for activation" developed; nonetheless,
alertness still depends on very archaic nervous system substructures. Knowledge of this dependence echoes
through myth and literature. Goethe's Mephistopheles is therefore able to state, for example:
"Follow the adage of my cousin Snake
From dreams of god-like knowledge you will wake
To fear, in which your very soul shall quake."456
The most "conscious" animal is the most motivated animal. The most motivated animal lives in
apprehension of the ever-present possibility of the greatest possible threat (that of its own demise) and in
eternal desire for rectification of this threat - in hope, in consideration of the possibilities of the dangerous
unknown for generation of "redemptive" information. It is clear apprehension of the mortal danger and
infinite possibility lurking everywhere that has boosted human consciousness far beyond that of its nearest
kin, in a process that extended over centuries. We can see the unknown in everything, as a consequence of
our elaborate cognitive systems: worse (better) - we can see mortal danger in everything unknown. This
makes us anxious, certainly - but also (if we don't run away) awake. The "serpent" of the "external
unknown" works in concert, therefore - so to speak - with the "serpent" of the internal unknown:
apprehension of the mystery which transcends the current realm of adaptation (that is, the permanent
mystery of mortal limitation) produces permanent consciousness - at least in principle. It is for this reason
that the Buddha is the "awakened one." Our expanding brain, "designed" to produce adaptation, instead
sees risk and opportunity everywhere. The circuitry "designed" to explore anomaly, and then to cease its
actions, once exploration has produced its desired consequences, is instead always operating - as it can
never reach its ever-receding goal. And so we are forever unsettled, unhappy, unsatisfied, terrified, hopeful
- and awake.
Individual incorporation of socially predicated knowledge - expanded exponentially in scope during the
course of centuries of human cultural endeavor, culminating in development of an elaborated self-model -
produced within the individual clear apprehension of mortality as a defining feature of human existence.
This act of self-definition inextricably associated every aspect of human experience with threat - eternally
contaminated all human experience with the intimation of mortality, with the hint of death, with the
absolutely inexplicable unknown. This act of self-definition drove us to consider the world we had built as
forever insufficient, forever lacking in security; drove us to regard the unknown "place of death," in
addition, as simultaneous eternal source of new redemptive information. This contamination rendered every
object, every facet of experience, permanently mysterious, and sufficiently motivating to maintain
heightened consciousness, as an interminable, awful and beneficial feature of human existence.
The myth of the Fall, Christian or Buddhist, describes the development of self-consciousness as
voluntary, though pre-arranged, in a sense, by the gods, whose power remains outside human control.
Lucifer, in the guise of the serpent, offers Eve the apple, with truly irresistible promise of expanded
knowledge. Fate arranges the future Buddha's introduction to old age, sickness, and death - but he chooses,
voluntarily, to leave the confines of the paradise his father endeavored to render perfect. It is the expansive
exploratory tendency of man, his innate curiosity, that is simultaneously saving grace and mortal error. For
this reason, the stories of Genesis and of the Buddha are predicated on the implicit assumption that contact
with the unbearable, in the course of maturation, is predetermined, inevitable - and desired, catastrophic
but desired. Voltaire tells a story, of the Good Brahmin - an admirable, tragic figure - which clarifies the
role of voluntarism (and pride) in the reach for heightened human awareness:
"'I wish I had never been born!'
'Why so?' said I.
'Because,' he replied, 'I have been studying these forty years, and I find that it has been so much
time lost.... I believe that I am composed of matter, but I have never been able to satisfy myself what it
is that produces thought. I am even ignorant whether my understanding is a simple faculty like that of
walking or digesting, or if I think with my head in the same manner as I take hold of a thing with my
239 


hands.... I talk a great deal, and when I have done speaking I remain confounded and ashamed of what I
have said.'
The same day I had a conversation with an old woman, his neighbour. I asked her if she had ever
been unhappy for not understanding how her soul was made? She did not even comprehend my
question. She had not, for the briefest moment in her life, had a thought about these subjects with which
the good Brahmin had so tormented himself. She believed in the bottom of her heart in the
metamorphoses of Vishnu, and provided she could get get some of the sacred water of the Ganges in
which to make her ablutions, she thought herself the happiest of women. Struck with the happiness of
this poor creature, I returned to my philosopher, whom I thus addressed:
' Are you not ashamed to be thus miserable when, not fifty yards from you, there is an old automaton
who thinks of nothing and lives contented?'
'You are right,' he replied. 'I have said to myself a thousand times that I should be happy if I were
but as ignorant as my old neighbour; and yet it is a happiness which I do not desire.'
This reply of the Brahmin made a greater impression on me than anything that had passed."457
The shame the Brahmin feels at his own words is a consequence of his realization of their insufficiency; is
a consequence of his self-comprehended inability to address the problems of life, in some manner that he
regards as final and complete. His shame and unhappiness is, paradoxically, a consequence of the activities
of the same process that enables him to seek redress - a process that is troublesome in the extreme, but so
valuable that it will not be abandoned, once attained. The questing spirit undermines its own stability, but
will not give up that destabilizing capacity for return to the "unconscious" source. This is, I suppose, part of
the "pride" of man, that serves as predestiny for the fall - but is, as well, part of another "unconscious"
apprehension: Something that destroys, initially, may still save, in its later development - and the process
that undermines may also be the same process that rebuilds, out of wreckage, something stronger.
The birth of tragedy and the evolution of shame might be considered inevitable consequences of
voluntarism itself, of the heroic exploratory tendency, diabolically predetermined in its unfolding, leading
inexorably to development of unbearable but potentially redemptive (self)consciousness. Extension of
objective knowledge to the self means permanent establishment of a conceptual connection between
individual existence and certain mortality. Development of this connection means existence in endless
conflict, as all human activity henceforth takes place in the valley of the shadow of death. Fate compels all
members of the human race to comprehend their isolation, their individuality, their abject subjugation to the
harsh conditions of mortal existence.458 Recognition of the naked self, exposed indignantly459 to the ravages
of time and the world, unbearable and highly motivating, condemns man and woman to toil and suffer for
life and for death:
And the eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked, and they sewed fig
leaves together, and made themselves aprons. (Genesis 3:7).
Acquisition of this unbearable knowledge renders unquestioning acceptance of biological necessity
impossible, and destroys all possibility of simple adherence to the paradisal way. Adam and Eve
immediately cover themselves up - erect a protective barrier, symbolic of culture itself, between their
vulnerable bodies, and the terrible world of experience. This emergent fear of vulnerability - a direct
consequence of the development of self-consciousness (no, an intrinsic aspect of self-consciousness) -
permanently undermines capacity for faith in blind instinctual action:
And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and Adam and
his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden.
And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?

And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself.
(Genesis 3:8-10).
Paradise is the place where heaven, earth and nature still touch - the place where man, who lives in
harmony with the animals, is still unrebellious, and still "walks with God." The conscious (?), but un-selfconscious
animal lives within the undisputed sway of natural processes. It cannot develop referential
240 






perspective regarding its own perceptions, impulses, and behaviors, because it lacks access to the
experience of others. The self-aware individual human being, by contrast, lives in history, in an experiential
field whose every aspect has been shaped and modified by experience communicated from extant
personage and ancestral figure. This socially-predicated historical construct appears to provide the basis for
sophisticated self-consciousness, which is (innate) capacity for self-reference, provided with content
through action of culture. Construction of self-consciousness requires elaboration of a self-model;
extension of the notion of the independent other to the self; internalization of a socially-determined
conceptual representation of the self. The capacity for such objective description arose as a consequence of
the communication of disembodied or abstracted thought from person to person, through processes ranging
in complexity from concrete imitation to generalized philosophical discourse.
The ability to communicate skill and representation makes it possible for the individual to internalize
and formulate a complex self-representation, to conceive of him or herself in terms of the experience of
others - that is, in terms of the experience of specific others, offering (and embodying) their defining
opinion, and the general other, historical humanity. This process apparently occurs (occurred) as each
person becomes subject not only to those unique experiences, which constitute his or her own being, but to
the experience of every other individual, transmitted imitatively, dramatically, linguistically. This spatially
and temporally summed wealth of culturally-predicated experience, whose cumulatively breadth and depth
far exceeds the productive capability of a single individual lifetime, must acquire tremendous intrapsychic
power, once transmitted and cortically represented, must become capable of fundamentally altering -
restricting and extending - innate personal experience. One inevitable consequence of this shared
perception is self-definition, development of individual self-awareness, under the pressure of immediate
transient experience, individual past, and historical opinion regarding the nature of one's own experience,
and human experience in general. The expansion of detailed communication allows the individual to
become at least partly aware of his or her own "objective" nature.
Individual intrapsychic representation of cumulative historically-predicated human experience makes
the one into the many, so to speak; makes the individual into the embodiment of group experience, to date.
Development of moral sense, and moral choice, constitutes an emergent property of such incorporation of
knowledge. Knowledge of morality, of good and evil, presupposes the presence of alternative possibilities
for action, in a given situation - means capacity for conceptualization of alternative ideals, towards which
behavior can be devoted. The animal, guided purely by its individual, biologically-determined perceptual
and motivational structures, essentially unaltered in function as a consequence of summed and stored
communication, develops no possibility for self-criticism, has no platform upon which to stand, to criticize
from - has no basis for comparison, no expanded repertoire of adaptive behavior, no capacity for
fantasizing about what could be and no cultural experience to flesh out that capacity. Animal perception
and action - animal experience - has not been made subject to historically-predicated self-conscious
analysis.
The animal, in its natural and constant environment, remains beyond (or before) good and evil, gripped
by its biologically-determined destiny, which is the will of God, from the mythic perspective. The human
being, by contrast, with a head full of alternative opinions (the abstracted residue of individual ancestral
choice), can use the internalized or freely offered opinion of the group to criticize spontaneous
manifestations of subjective perception and motivation - to judge, alter, or inhibit pure subjectivity itself.
This ability allows the human being tremendous interpretive and behavioral possibility, freedom, but lays
subjective experience, untarnished instinct, bare to insult. This separation of man from immersion in the
natural way constitutes a remarkable achievement, with eternally unsettling consequences.
The birth of tragedy and the evolution of shame might be considered emergent properties of selfconsciousness.
The idea of redemption, which compensates for self-conscious existential anxiety, might be
considered another, higher-order emergent property. The tradition of the "fall from paradise" is predicated
on the idea that the appearance of self-consciousness dramatically altered the structure of reality. The
explicitly religious accept the notion that man and God have been tragically estranged - that human actions
have shattered the divine order. This idea is so central to our world-view that it crops up everywhere - in
the ease with which we can all be made to feel guilty, in the (often explicitly areligious) view that human
existence is "foreign" to the "natural order" (that human activity is detrimental to the environment, that the
planet would somehow be "better off" with no people on it), that our species is somehow innately disturbed
241 






or even insane. Our constantly emerging self-reference (our constantly developing self-consciousness) has
turned the world of experience into a tragic play:
Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt
bring forth children;460 and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.
And unto Adam he said, Because thou has hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the
tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in
sorrow shalt thou eat of it for all the days of thy life;

Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth for thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;

In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for dust thou art, and unto
dust shalt thou return." (Genesis 3:16-19).

Figure 56: Genesis and Descent.
Fore-knowledge of destiny seals fate, and Paradise is forever lost to man:
And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest
he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever:

Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was
taken.
So he drove out the man: and he placed at the east of the Garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming
sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life. (Genesis 3:22-24).
242 
Why hide from God? Because knowledge of vulnerability makes us shrink from our own potential. To live,
fully, is to risk - to risk everything, to risk death. Why hide from God? How, under such conditions, could
we not hide? Survival has become terror, and endless toil - necessitating discipline, compelled by
burdensome wisdom, rife with intrapsychic conflict, motivated by anxiety - instead of spontaneous natural
activity. We remain eternally hung on the cross of our own vulnerability. The creation and fall of man is
portrayed schematically in Figure 56: Genesis and Descent. 461
243 

CHAPTER 5: THE HOSTILE BROTHERS: ARCHETYPES OF RESPONSE TO THE
UNKNOWN

The "contamination of anomaly with the threat of death," attendant on the development of selfconsciousness,
amplifies the valence of the unknown to a virtually unbearable point. This unbearable
amplification has motivated the development of two transpersonal patterns of behavior and schemas of
representation, comprising the individual as such, embodied in mythology as the "hostile brothers." One of
these "hostile brothers," or "eternal sons of God," is the mythological hero. He faces the unknown with
the presumption of its benevolence - with the (unprovable) attitude that confrontation with the unknown
will bring renewal and redemption. He enter, voluntarily, into creative "union with the Great Mother,"
builds or regenerates society, and brings peace to a warring world.
The other "son of God" is the eternal adversary. This "spirit of unbridled rationality," horrified by his
limited apprehension of the conditions of existence, shrinks from contact with everything he does not
understand. This shrinking weakens his personality, no longer nourished by the "water of life," and makes
him rigid and authoritarian, as he clings desperately to the familiar, "rational," and stable. Every deceitful
retreat increases his fear; every new "protective law" increases his frustration, boredom and contempt for
life. His weakness, in combination with his neurotic suffering, engenders resentment and hatred for
existence itself.
The personality of the adversary comes in two forms, so to speak - although these two forms are
inseparably linked. The fascist sacrifices his soul, which would enable him to confront change on his own,
to the group, which promises to protect him from everything unknown. The decadent, by contrast, refuses to
join the social world, and clings rigidly to his own ideas - merely because he is too undisciplined to serve
as an apprentice. The fascist wants to crush everything different, and then everything; the decadent
immolates himself, and builds the fascist from his ashes. The bloody excesses of the twentieth century,
manifest most evidently in the culture of the concentration camp, stand as testimony to the desires of the
adversary, and as monument to his power.
The pitfalls of fascism and decadence may be avoided through identification with the hero, the true
individual. The hero organizes the demands of social being and the responsibilities of his own soul into a
coherent, hierarchically arranged unit. He stands on the border between order and chaos, and serves the
group as creator and agent of renewal. The hero's voluntary contact with the unknown transforms it into
something benevolent - into the eternal source, in fact, of strength and ability. Development of such
strength - attendant upon faith in the conditions of experience - enables him to stand outside the group,
when necessary, and to use it as a tool, rather than as armor. The hero rejects identification with the group
as the ideal of life, preferring to follow the dictates of his conscience and his heart. His identification with
meaning - and his refusal to sacrifice meaning for security - renders existence acceptable, despite its
tragedy.
5.1. Introduction: The Hero and the Adversary
The culture bequeathed to us by our forebears degenerates of its own accord, as the flux of the present
invalidates the static presuppositions of the past. We may speed this process of degeneration by our "sins"
- by voluntary refusal to attend to our errors, when they manifest themselves, and by failure to adjust
behaviors and attitudes, in consequence. Through such refusal and failure, we transform the irritations of
the present into the catastrophes of the future, and invite a wrathful God to drown us beneath the waves.
"As has been well known since the compilations made by R. Andree, H. Usener, and J.G. Frazer, the
deluge myth is almost universally disseminated; it is documented in all the continents (although very rarely
in Africa) and on various cultural levels. A certain number of variants seem to be the result of
dissemination, first from Mesopotamia and then from India. It is equally possible that one or several
diluvial catastrophers gave rise to fabulous narratives. But it would be risky to explain so widespread a
244 




myth by phenomena of which no geological traces have been found. The majority of the flood myths seem in
some sense to form part of the cosmic rhythm: the old world, peopled by a fallen humanity, is submerged
under the waters, and some time later a new world emerges from the aquatic "chaos."
In a large number of variants, the flood is the result of the sins (or ritual faults) of human beings:
sometimes it results simply from the wish of a divine being to put an end to mankind.... the chief causes lie
at once in the sins of men and the decrepitude of the world. By the mere fact that it exists - that is, that it
lives and produces - the cosmos gradually deteriorates and ends by falling into decay. This is the reason
why it has to be recreated. In other words, the flood realizes, on the macrocosmic scale, what is
symbolically effected during the New Year festival: the "end of the world" and the end of a sinful humanity
in order to make a new creation possible."462
No discussion of the "architecture of belief" can possibly be considered complete in the absence of
reference to evil. Evil is no longer a popular word, so to speak - the term is generally considered oldfashioned,
not applicable in a society that has theoretically dispensed with its religious preoccupations.
Acts once defined as evil are now merely considered the consequence of unjust familial, social or economic
structures (although this view is not as widespread as it once was). Alternatively, the commission of
incomprehensible acts of cruelty and destruction are viewed as symptomatic of some physiological
weakness or disease. Seldom are acts of evil considered voluntary or purposeful - committed by someone
possessed by an aesthetic that makes art of terror and pain.
In the Egyptian cosmology, Osiris, the king, mythic image of the known, the Great Father, has an eternal
evil twin and opposite, Seth, who eventually leads Osiris to his death. Four thousand years later, the moral
of this great story has not yet been grasped: failure to understand the nature of evil leads to its eventual
victory. At the end of this, the most cruel and bloodthirsty of centuries, we are in danger not only of failing
to understand evil, but of denying its very existence. Invisibility, however, is what the devil craves most.
I have spent a substantial amount of time, up to this point, describing the nature of culture, and the
manner in which it is generated. Culture, the Great Father, protects us from the terrors of the unknown;
defines around us a sacred space into which nothing unbearably foreign is allowed. Culture is generated by
the process whose essential features have been captured in the pervasive and recurrent myths of the hero.
This hero is the individual who voluntarily faces the dragon of the unknown, cuts it up, and creates the
world from its pieces; the individual who overcomes the too-long senescent tyrant, and frees the virgin
mother from his grasp. Such myths present a world starkly ambivalent in its nature: the "natural" world is
endlessly creative, and equally destructive; the inextricably associated social "environment" is
simultaneously tyrannical and protective. So far in our discussion, however, the hero has stood alone. This
means that our story is far from over. The essential ambivalence characterizing the "constituent elements of
experience" extends to the individual, as well - to the individual, who is capable of thoughts and actions as
dark and destructive as anything in society or nature.
Mythology envelops the transpersonal capacity for evil characterizing the individual, as such, in the
guise of a personality - duplicating its encapsulation of chaos and order. The dark side of the individual is
the absolute adversary of the hero - is the personality who shrinks from contact with the unknown, or who
denies that it exists, instead of actively approaching and exploring; is the personality whose "advice"
speeds the decline of society, rather than renewing it. The image of this personality - like the phenomenon
itself - has developed and become elaborated in complexity and sophistication over the course of centuries:
proper understanding of its nature is terrifying, in a salutary sort of way. This informative terror is the
"purpose" of encapsulation in narrative, in transpersonal memory: the image of the Christian devil, for
example, is the best "bad example" available. His (implicit or explicit) imitation leads to disaster; the
stories which portray his central features exist as object lessons in the consequences of resentment, hatred,
totalitarian arrogance, and jealousy.
"Evil," like "good," is not something static: it does not merely mean "breaking the rules," for example,
and is not simply aggression, anger, force, pain, disappointment, anxiety, or horror. Life is of course
endlessly complicated by the fact that what is bad in one circumstance is positively necessary in the next. I
245 






noted previously463 that the answer to the question "what is the good?" must in fact be sought in the metadomain,
so to speak: the more fundamental mystery - given the context-dependent nature of "the good" - is
"how are answers to the question 'what is the good?' endlessly and appropriately generated?" The "good,"
then, becomes the set of circumstances that allow the process of moral construction to flourish - or
becomes the process of moral construction itself. The problem "what then is evil?" must be addressed
similarly.
Evil is rejection of and sworn opposition to the process of creative exploration. Evil is proud repudiation
of the unknown, and willful failure to understand, transcend, and transform the social world. Evil is, in
addition - and in consequence - hatred of the virtuous and courageous, precisely on account of their virtue
and courage. Evil is the desire to disseminate darkness, for the love of darkness, where there could be light.
The spirit of evil underlies all actions that speed along the decrepitude of the world; underlies all actions
that foster God's desire to inundate and destroy everything that exists.
Great evils are easily identifiable, at least in retrospect, and are usually the result (at least in
interpretation) of the act of another. We build endless memorials to the Holocaust, for example, and swear
never to forget. But what is it that we are remembering? What is the lesson we are supposed to have
learned? We don't know how the Holocaust came about - don't know what it is that the people involved
did, or failed to do, step by step, that made them behave in such an appalling manner; don't know what or
who made German society take such a terrible turn. Even Hitler - how could Hitler fail to believe that he
was correct, when everyone around him bowed to his orders? Would it not take character of exceptional
magnitude to resist the temptation of absolute power, freely offered, democratically granted - even insisted
upon? How would it be possible for anyone to remain properly humble, under such conditions? Most of us
have personal frailties that remain constrained by our social environments. Our neurotic tendencies are
checked by the people around us, who care for us, who complain and protest when we lose our self-control
and take things, in our weakness, one step too far. If everyone around thinks you are the savior, who is left
to point out your defects, and keep you conscious of them? This is not an apology for Hitler: merely
recognition that he was all-too-human. And what does that statement mean? Hitler was human; Stalin too -
Idi Amin, too. What does that mean about being human?
Our tyrannical tendencies and moral decadences generally find their expression limited by our narrow
domains of personal power. We cannot doom millions to death, at a whim, because we do not have the
resources to do so. We satisfy ourselves, in the absence of such power, with riding roughshod over those
near to us - and congratulate ourselves on our moral virtue. We use aggression and strength to bend
dependent others to our will - or, in the absence of strength, use sickness and weakness to harness the force
of empathy, and deceive our way to dominance, underground. Granted the opportunity, how many of us
would not be Hitlers? Assuming we had the ambition, dedication and power of organization - which is
highly unlikely. Paucity of skill, however, does not constitute moral virtue.
Many kings are tyrants, or moral decadents, because they are people - and many people are tyrants, or
moral decadents. We cannot say "never again" as a consequence of the memory of the Holocaust, because
we do not understand the Holocaust - and it is impossible to remember what has not been understood. We
do not understand the Holocaust, because we do not comprehend ourselves. Human beings, very much like
ourselves, produced the moral catastrophes of the Second World War (and of Stalin's Soviet Union, and of
Pol Pot's Cambodia ...). "Never forget" means "know thyself" - means recognize and understand that evil
twin, that mortal enemy, who is part and parcel of every individual.
The heroic tendency - the archetypal savior - is an eternal spirit, which is to say, a central and
permanent aspect of human being. The same is true, precisely, of the "adversarial" tendency: the capacity
for endless denial, and the desire to make everything suffer for the outrage of its existence, is an
ineradicable intrapsychic element of the individual. The great dramatists and religious thinkers of the world
have been able to grasp this fact, at least implicitly, and to transmit it in story and image; modern analytic
thinkers and existential theorists have attempted to abstract these ideas upward into "higher consciousness,"
and to present them in logical and purely semantic form. Sufficient data have been gathered to present a
compelling portrait of evil.
246 




5.2. The Adversary: Emergence, Development and Representation
The figure of Satan is arguably the most well-developed representation of evil extant in religious and
mythological thought. Although it is tempting to identify this "personage" with particular personality
attributes, such as aggression - or with the differences of the stranger - it is more realistic to view him as
the embodiment of a personal and social process. The Devil is the spirit who underlies development of
totalitarianism; the spirit who is characterized by rigid ideological belief (by the "predominance of the
rational mind"), by reliance on the lie as a mode of adaptation (by refusal to admit to the existence of
error, or to appreciate the necessity of deviance), and by the inevitable development of hatred for the self
and world. Each of these characteristics are intrinsically and causally related; they are linked inextricably
together, and can be aptly conceptualized as a transpersonal and eternal personality.
The Devil is willful rejection of the process that makes life bearable, out of spite for the tragic
conditions of existence. This rejection is intellectually arrogant, because the "conditions" are interpreted -
which is to say: development of self-consciousness tainted everything with death, but self-consciousness is
contained within a global understanding that is still exceptionally limited in its scope. The present, as
currently interpreted, is indeed the unbearable present: but that interpretation may change, if the
possibility for change is not disallowed, as a consequence of absolutist belief, conceit and resentment.
The Devil works to eliminate the world, as something whose weakness and vulnerability makes it
contemptible. He has produced dreadful suffering in the twentieth century - not least among cultures who
dispensed with his image. We are fortunate to have survived, without an irreversible tragedy. Our luck to
date should not blind us to the dangers of continued ignorance, or to the necessity of bringing our poorlycomprehended
selves under control. Every technological advance we make increases our power; every
increase in power makes our internal integration and expanded self-consciousness that much more
necessary.
"The noble soul has reverence for itself."464
As I looked deeper into the problem of evil, over the course of the last fourteen years, I found myself
increasingly and involuntarily fascinated with the myth of Satan, and curious about the position of this
story in relationship to Western thought. The idea of the Devil has exerted a powerful influence on the
development of Christianity and Christian culture - and, therefore, on Western and world society -
although there is little direct reference to Satan, in the Old and New Testaments (surprisingly little: no
description of hell, to speak of, limited and oblique reference to the rebellion of the angels and the war in
heaven, preceding the establishment of hell; nothing of any consequence regarding the terrible afterlife that
theoretically awaits all sinners).
It is my understanding that traditional and literary representations of Satan, the ruling angel of hell,
constitute true mythology. These ideas surround the established central writings and ideas of Christianity,
like a cloud surrounds a mountain. They have been transmitted to us, in part, as religious doctrine; in part,
as oral tradition; in part, because of the efforts of Dante and Milton. I had a very limited religious
education, in my youth, and all I ever knew about the Devil was "hearsay" - bits and pieces I picked up
while reading other material (such as Joyce's Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, which contains a
terrifying Jesuit sermon on the wages of sin). All I knew was the outline of the story codified by Milton:
Satan, the highest angel in God's heavenly hierarchy, desired to become like the Most High, and fostered a
rebellion in heaven. He was defeated, and cast, unrepentant, into Hell, where he rules eternally over the
spirits of the sinful dead. I had no real idea what this story meant, although it was obvious to me that these
characters and events could have never "really" existed.
I learned later that the association made between the Serpent in Eden and the Devil was essentially
speculative. Indeed, certain Gnostics had even posited that the deity who brought Adam and Eve to the
light of self-consciousness was a higher spirit than the unconscious demi-urge who had created everything,
in the beginning. This idea was predicated upon Gnostic "recognition" that a fall from paradise, so to speak
- that is, from a previous "plane of stability" - often comprised the necessary precondition for movement to
247 












a "higher place." Traditional medieval Christians developed a similar idea. For them, Original Sin was a
"fortunate error" that made necessary the incarnation of Christ. This meant that the Christian fall, although
tragic in and of itself, could be regarded as positively beneficial, since it brought about the redemptive
incarnation of God (which was the most stupendous event in history, from the Christian perspective).
Adoption of this broader viewpoint allowed even the Edenic serpent, who propelled mankind into chaos, to
be interpreted as a "tool of God" - as a tool of the beneficial God who is endlessly working to bring about
the perfection of the world, despite the troublesome existence of free choice and demonic temptation. (The
name, Lucifer, means "bringer of light," after all - as I have noted previously.) I also knew, more or less
"unconsciously," that the Devil has been long associated with the power and arrogance of rational thought
(in Goethe's Faust, for example). This association has enabled the dogmatic forces of the Church to adopt
an anti-scientific stance, frequently - science ? rationality ? devil - and to justify unfortunate Church
opposition to emergent truth. However, a mythological idea is not invalidated as an idea in consequence of
its misapplication. The capacity for rational thought is a dangerous force, without doubt - because a
powerful force - and the conditions under which thinking plays a purely destructive role are still not wellcomprehended.

This plethora of vaguely related ideas and stories kept entering and re-entering my mind: sometimes in
combination with remembrance of a telling symbolic historic act - the transformation of the Notre Dame
Cathedral into the "Temple of Reason" in the midst of the terrors of the French Revolution. It is no easy
matter to come to a clear understanding of such notions, to grasp their nature logically or emotionally, or
even to determine how they could possibly be related. After all, we tend to regard the development of
"clear understanding" as equivalent to the construction of a "proper set," and assume that the reality of a
thing can be clearly defined. Ideas about evil, however, do not form a "proper set." They form a "natural
category," containing diverse material - just like ideas about the "known" or the "unknown" form such a
category. To complicate things further, evil - like good - is not something static (although it may align
itself with all that is stubbornly static). It is rather a dynamic process, a spirit, that partakes of the
motivational or affective states of pride, resentment, jealousy, and hatred - but which cannot be identified
unerringly with the presence of any or all. The morality of an aggressive act, for example, depends on the
nature of the context in which it is manifested, just as the meaning of a given word is defined by the
sentence, the paragraph - even the book or culture - in which it appears. Evil is a living complex. Its nature
can be most clearly comprehended through examination of the "personality" it has "adopted" in mythology,
literature, and fantasy, elaborated in the lengthy course of historical development. This personality consists
of those "meta"-attributes of evil that have remained stable, over time - despite dramatic shifts in the
particulars of human existence and human morality.
The image of the Devil is the form that the idea of evil has taken, for better or worse, at least in the
West. We have not yet developed an explicit model of evil, that would allow us to forget, transcend, or
otherwise dispense with this mythological representation. We rationalize our lack of such understanding by
presuming that the very notion of evil is archaic - a presumption truly ridiculous, in this century of
indescribable horror. In our ignorance and complaceny, we deride ancient stories about the nature of evil -
equate them half-consciously with childish things best put away. This is an exceedingly arrogant position.
There is no evidence whatsoever that we understand the nature of evil any better than our forebears, despite
our psychology, even though our expanded technological power has made us much more dangerous when
we are possessed. Our ancestors were at least constantly concerned with the problem of evil. Acceptance of
the harsh Christian dogma of Original Sin, for example (despite its pessimism and apparent inequity) at
least meant recognition of evil; meant some comprehension of the tendency towards evil as an intrinsic,
heritable aspect of human nature. From the perspective informed by belief in Original Sin, individual
actions and motivations must always be carefully scrutinized and considered - even when apparently
benevolent - lest the ever-present adversarial tendencies "accidentally" gain the upper hand. The dogma of
Original Sin forces every individual to regard himself as the (potential) immediate source of evil - to locate
the terrible underworld of mythology and its denizens in intrapsychic space. It is no wonder that this idea
has become unpopular: nonetheless, evil exists somewhere. It remains difficult not to see hypocrisy in the
souls of those who wish to localize it somewhere else.
Once I understood these things - in a provisional sort of way - the ancient ideas began to sort
themselves out. I learned from Eliade how to make sense out of the notion of a "heavenly hierarchy." The
248 


monotheism of Judaism and Christianity has its roots in older, more polytheistic thinking. The many gods
of archaic conceptualization became the single Ruler of more modern religious thinking as a consequence
of spiritual competition, so to speak. This competition is the battle of ideas with implication for action -
fought in abstraction, image and in the course of genuine earthly combat - portrayed in mythology as
spiritual war, played out in "heaven" (which is the "place" where transpersonal ideas exist). The Deity who
came to prevail over all is One God, with a complex set of attributes, "surrounded" by a panoply of angels
and divine "echoes" of previous gods (who represent those transpersonal and eternal psychological
processes rendered subordinate in the course of the spiritual phylogenesis of man).
Figure 57: The Devil as Aerial Spirit and Ungodly Intellect

249 








Christian mythology portrays Satan as the "highest angel" in God's "heavenly kingdom." This fact
renders his association with reason more comprehensible. Reason may well be considered the "highest
angel"- which is to say, the most developed and remarkable psychological or spiritual faculty,
characteristic of all men (and therefore, something transpersonal and eternal). Figure 57: The Devil as
Aerial Spirit and Ungodly Intellect portrays Eugene Delacroix's imagistic interpretation - an illustration
for part one of Faust. 465 Reason, the most exceptional of spirits, suffers from the greatest of temptations:
reason's own capacity for self-recognition - and self-admiration - means endless capacity for pride, which
is the act of presuming omniscience. It is reason's remarkable ability, and its own recognition of that
ability, which leads it to believe that it is in possession of absolute knowledge, and can therefore replace, or
do without, God:
"He trusted to have equalled the Most High,
If he opposed, and with ambitious aim

Against the throne and monarchy of God,
Raised impious war in Heaven .466

It is reason's belief in its own omniscience - manifest in procedure and image, if not in word - that
"unconsciously" underlies totalitarianism, in its many destructive guises. Frye notes:
"A demonic fall, as Milton presents it, involves defiance of and rivalry with God rather than simple
disobedience, and hence the demonic society is a sustained and systematic parody of the divine one,
associated with devils or fallen angels because it seems far beyond normal human capacities in its
powers. We read of ascending and descending angels on Jacob's and Plato's ladders, and similarly there
seem to be demonic reinforcements in heathen life that account for the almost superhuman grandeur of
the heathen empires, especially just before they fall.
Two particularly notable passages in the Old Testament prophets linked to this theme are the
denunciation of Babylon in Isaiah 14 and of Tyre in Ezekiel 28. Babylon is associated with Lucifer the
morning star, who said to himself: 'I will be like the Most High'; Tyre is identified with a 'Covering
Cherub,' a splendid creature living in the garden of Eden 'till the day that iniquity was found in thee.' In
the New Testament (Luke 10:18) Jesus speaks of Satan as falling from heaven, hence Satan's traditional
identification with Isaiah's Lucifer and his growth in legend into the great adversary of God, once the
prince of the angels, and, before being displaced, the firstborn son of God. The superhuman demonic
force behind the heathen kingdoms is called in Christianity the Antichrist, the earthly ruler demanding
divine honors."467
It is not that easy to understand why the act of presuming omniscience is reasonably construed as precisely
opposite to the act of creative exploration (as the adversary is opposite to the hero). What "knowing
everything" means, however - at least in practice - is that the unknown no longer exists, and that further
exploration has therefore been rendered superfluous - has been rendered unnecessary, by definition (even
treacherous). This means that absolute identification with the "known" necessarily comes to replace all
opportunity for identification with the process that comes to know. The presumption of absolute
knowledge, which is the cardinal sin of the rational spirit, is therefore prima facie equivalent to rejection of
the hero - to rejection of Christ, of the Word of God, of the (divine) process that mediates between order
and chaos. The arrogance of the totalitarian stance is ineradicably opposed to the "humility" of creative
exploration. [Humility -it is only constant admission of error and capacity for error (admssion of "sinful
and ignorant nature") that allows for recognition of the unknown, and then for update of knowledge and
adaptation in behavior. Such humility is, somewhat paradoxically, courageous - as admission of error and
possibility for error constitutes the necessary precondition for confrontation with the unknown. This makes
genuine cowardice the "underground" motivation for the totalitarian presumption: the true authoritarian
wants everything unpredictable to vanish. The authoritarian protects himself from knowledge of this
cowardice by a show of patriotic advocacy - often at apparent cost to himself.]
In the fifth book of Paradise Lost - which Milton constructed from Biblical and mythological allusions -
Lucifer is "passed over" by God, in honor of the "second son," Christ. 468 This "shift in the dominance
250 








hierarchy of heaven" seems to me to indicate that reason (which, in consequence of its self-recognition as
the "highest angel" of God, believes itself capable of single-handedly engendering redemption) must
remain subordinate to the processes of the exploratory hero. Reason can only serve health - can only serve
life - when it plays a secondary role. The option of ruling in hell, rather than serving in heaven, nonetheless
appears as an attractive alternative to the rational mind, under a wide variety of circumstances.
The Devil is the spirit who eternally states, "all that I know is all that there is to be known"; the spirit
who falls in love with his own beautiful productions and, in consequence, can no longer see beyond them.
The Devil is the desire to be right, above all, to be right once and for all and finally, rather than to
constantly admit to insufficiency and ignorance, and to therefore partake in the process of creation itself.
The Devil is the spirit which endlessly denies, because it is afraid, in the final analysis, afraid and weak.
It is lack of discrimination between the existence of the adversary as process with the existence of
anomaly as constituent element of experience that has lead to some of the worst excesses of Christianity
(and not just Christianity). It has constantly been the case that "proper-thinking people" confuse the
existence of "threats to their security and moral integrity" with evil. This means that the proper-thinking
confuse the being of the genius and the stranger, who offer up experience that exists in contrast with
established belief, with the process of rejection of that experience. This lack of discrimination is both
comprehensible, and motivated: comprehensible, because the strange/stranger/strange idea/revolutionary
hero upsets the apple-cart, and produces affective dysregulation (which is the state most devoutly desired
by the devil); motivated, because categorizing anomaly with evil allows for its "justified" repression. The
heroic act of updating current morality, however - through the promotion of uncomfortable contact with
the unknown - creates chaos only in the service of higher order. To repress that process and cling
"patriotically" to tradition is to ensure that tradition will collapse precipitously - and far more dangerously
- at some point in the not-too-distant future.
The fact of my lascivious or aggressive fantasy - to take a specific example of things generally regarded
in a dim light - is not evil, if I am a devout Christian: evil is the act of denying that such fantasy exists (or,
perhaps, the act of realizing that fantasy, without consideration of its proper place). The fantasy itself
merely constitutes information (unacceptable information, to be sure, from the current, merely provisional
standpoint: but information with the capacity to transform, if admitted). The existence of the Muslim, and
the Muslim viewpoint, likewise is not evil, if I am a devout Christian. Evil is instead my presumption of
personal omniscience - my certainty that I understand my Christian belief well enough to presume its
necessary opposition to the stranger and his ideas; my certainty that identification with a static
"comprehended" moral structure is sufficient to guarantee my integrity - and my consequent ignorant and
self-righteous persecution of the Muslim. The Devil is not the uncomfortable fact, but the act of shrinking
from that fact. The weakness, stupidity, laxity and ignorance that ineradicably constitutes the individual is
not evil in and of itself. These "insufficiencies" are a necessary consequence of the limitations that make
experience possible. It is the act of denying that stupidity exists, once it has manifested itself, that is evil -
because stupidity cannot then be overcome. Such denial brings spiritual progress to a halt. Consciousness of
ignorance and cupidity manifests itself in shame, anxiety, and pain - in the guise of the visitor whose
arrival is most feared - and such consciousness may come, in consequence, to be considered the
embodiment of evil itself. But it is the bearer of bad news who brings us closer to the light, if the
significance of the news is allowed to manifest itself.
Elaine Pagels has recently written a book - The Origin of Satan 469 - in which she describes how the
idea of the Devil as the eternal enemy of Christ enabled those who profess Christianity to persecute those
who do not. The presuppositions of the persecutor are, for example: "the Devil is the enemy, the Jew is not
a Christian - the Jew is an enemy, the Jew is the Devil." Pagels presents the not-unreasonable and
justifiably popular hypothesis that the "invention" of Satan was motivated by desire to transform the act of
persecuting others into a moral virtue. It appears, however, that the historical "developmental path" of the
"idea of the adversary" is somewhat more complex. Transpersonal notions of the breadth of the "image of
the Devil" cannot emerge as a consequence of conscious motivation, because their development requires
many centuries of trans-generational work (which cannot be easily "organized"). The image of the Devil,
although endlessly applied to rationalize the subjugation of others (as all great ideas can be subverted)
emerged as a consequence of endless geniune attempts to encapsulate the "personality" of evil. The logic
that associates the other with the Devil only works for those who think that religion means belief - that is,
251 





identification with a set of static and often unreasonable "facts" - and not action, meta-imitation, or the
incarnation of the creative process in behavior. The existence of the anomalous fact, properly considered -
the uncomfortable fact, embodied in the stranger or rendered abstract in the form of differing philosophy -
is a call to religious action, and not an evil.
It has taken mankind thousands of years of work to develop dawning awareness of the nature of evil - to
produce a detailed dramatic representation of the process that makes up the core of human maladaptation
and voluntarily produced misery. It seems premature to throw away the fruit of that labor - or to presume
that it is something other than what it appears - before we understand what it signifies. Consciousness of
evil emerged first as ritual enactment - then dynamic image, expressed in myth. This representation covers
a broad spatial and temporal territory, whose examination helps flesh out understanding of the personality
of the adversary. The most thoroughly developed archaic personification of evil - outside the JudeoChristian
tradition - can perhaps be found in the ideas of Zoroastrianism, which flourished in relatively
explicit form from 1000-600 B.C. (and which undoubtedly depended for its form on much more ancient
less explicit "ideas"). The Zoroastrians developed a number of ideas which were later incorporated into
Christianity, including "the myth of the savior; the elaboration of an optimistic eschatology, proclaiming
the final triumph of Good and universal salvation; [and] the doctrine of the resurrection of bodies...."470
Zarathustra, the mythic founder of Zorastrianism, was a follower of Ahura Mazda (the central deity in
this essentially monotheistic religion). Ahura ("sky") Mazda was surrounded by a pantheon of divine
entities - the Amesha Spentas, analogous to angels - who were very much evidently psychological in their
nature (at least from the modern perspective).471 These "spirits" include Asha (justice), Vohu Manah (good
thought), Armaiti (devotion), Xshathra (power), Harvatat (integrity) and Ameretat (immortality). Ahura
Mazda was also the father of twin "brothers," spirits - Spenta Mainyu (the beneficient spirit) and Angra
Mainyu (the destroying spirit). Eliade states:
"In the beginning, it is stated in a famous gatha (Yasna 30, authored by Zarathustra), these two spirits
chose, one of them good and life, the other evil and death. Spenta Mainyu declares, at the 'beginning of
existence,' to the Destroying Spirit: 'Neither our thoughts nor our doctrines, nor our mental powers;
neither our choices, nor our words, nor our acts; neither our consciences nor our souls are in agreement.'
This shows that the two spirits - the one holy, the other wicked - differ rather by choice than by nature.
Zarathustra's theology is not dualistic in the strict sense of the term, since Ahura Mazda is not
confronted by an anti-God; in the beginning, the opposition breaks out between the two Spirits. On the
other hand, the unity between Ahura Mazda and the Holy [Good] Spirit is several times implied (see
Yasna 43.3, etc.). In short, Good and Evil, the holy one and the destroying demon, proceed from Ahura
Mazda; but since Angra Mainyu freely chose his mode of being and his malificient vocation, the Wise
Lord cannot be considered responsible for the appearance of Evil. On the other hand, Ahura Mazda, in
his omniscience, knew from the beginning what choice the Destroying Spirit would make and
nevertheless did not prevent it; this may mean either that God transcends all kinds of contradictions or
that the existence of evil constitutes the preliminary condition for human freedom."472
The mythic "hostile brothers" - Spenta Mainyu and Angra Mainyu, Osiris and Seth, Gilgamesh and
Enkidu, Cain and Abel, Christ and Satan - are representative of two eternal individual tendencies, twin
"sons of god," heroic and adversarial. The former tendency, the archetypal savior, is the everlasting spirit
of creation and transformation: characterized eternally by the capacity to admit to the unknown and,
therefore, to progress towards "the kingdom of heaven." The eternal adversary, by contrast, is incarnation
in practice, imagination, and philosophy of the spirit of denial - is eternal rejection of the "redeeming
unknown," and the adoption of rigid self-identification. Myths of the "hostile brothers" - like those of the
Zoroastrians - tend to emphasize the role of free choice in determination of essential mode of being. Christ,
for example (and Gautama Buddha) are tempted constantly and potently towards evil, but choose to reject
it. Angra Mainyu and Satan accept evil, by contrast, and revel in it (despite evidence that it produces their
own suffering). The choice of these spirits cannot be reduced to some more essential aspect, such as the
particular conditions of existence (which are identical, anyway, for both "beings") or the vagaries of
intrinsic nature. It is voluntary willingness to do what is known to be wrong, despite the capacity to
252 




understand and avoid such action, that most particularly characterizes evil - the evil of spirit and man. So
Milton's God can comment, on the degeneration of Satan and mankind:
"So will fall
Hee and his faithless progeny: whose fault?
Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of mee
All he could have; I made him just and right,
sufficient to have stood, though free to fall."473
Refusal of the good is, I think, most effectively and frequently justified by reference to the terrible
affective consequences of (self)consciousness. This means that comprehension of the vulnerabilty and
mortality of man, and the suffering associated with that vulnerability -apprehension of the "ultimate cruelty
and pointlessness of life" - may be utilized as rationale for evil. Life is terrible, and appears, at some
moments, ultimately terrible: unfair, irrational, painful and meaningless. Interpreted in such a light,
existence itself may well appear as something reasonably eradicated. Goethe's Mephistopheles, "prince of
lies," defines his philosophy, in consequence, in the following terms (in Part One of Faust):
"The spirit I, that endlessly denies.
And rightly, too; for all that comes to birth
Is fit for overthrow, as nothing worth;
Wherefore the world were better sterilized;
Thus all that's here as Evil recognized
Is gain to me, and downfall, ruin, sin
The very element I prosper in."474
He repeats this credo, in slightly elaborated form, in Part Two:
"Gone, to sheer Nothing, past with null made one!
What matters our creative endless toil,
When, at a snatch, oblivion ends the coil?
"It is by-gone" - How shall this riddle run?
As good as if things never had begun,
Yet circle back, existence to possess:
I'd rather have Eternal Emptiness."475
Spiritual reality plays itself out endlessly in profane reality (as man remains eternally subject to the
"dictates of the gods"). Individual persons therefore "unconsciously" embody mythological themes. Such
embodiment becomes particularly evident in the case of great individuals, where the play of "divine forces"
becomes virtually tangible. We analyzed sections of Leo Tolstoy's autobiography, previously476 - using his
self-reported personal experience as universal exemplar for the catastrophic affective consequences of
revolutionary anomaly. Tolstoy's ideological response to such anomaly is equally archetypal. The "news"
from Western Europe - the revelation of the "death of God" - cascaded through the great author's implicit
and explicit culturally-determined beliefs and action schemas, propelling him headlong, over a very lengthy
period of time, into emotional turmoil and existential chaos. Identification with the spirit of denial lurked as
a profound temptation, in the midst of that chaos.
Tolstoy begins the relevant section of his confession with an allegory, derived "from a tale of the East."
A traveller, chased by a wild beast, jumps down an old well. He grabs the branch of a vine that happens to
be growing there, and clings to it. At the bottom of the well lurks an ancient dragon, mouth gaping. Above
the well is the terrible beast - so there is no turning back. The traveller's arms grow weak, clinging to the
vine, but he still holds on. Then he sees two mice - one black, one white - gnawing at either side of the
very branch that supports him. Soon they will chew their way through, and send him plummeting into the
dragon's gullet. The traveller sees some drops of honey, on the leaves of the vine. He stretches out his
tongue, tastes the honey, and is comforted. For Tolstoy, however, the pleasures of life had lost their
analgesic sweetness:
253 
"I could not be deceived. All is vanity. Happy is he who has never been born; death is better than life;
we must rid ourselves of life.
Having failed to find an explanation in knowledge, I began to look for it in life, hoping to find it in
the people around me. And so I began to observe people like myself to see how they lived and to
determine what sort of relation they had with the question that had led me to despair.
And this is what I found among people whose circumstances were precisely the same as mine with
respect to education and way of life.
I found that for the people of my class there were four means of escaping the terrible situation in
which we all find ourselves.
The first means of escape is that of ignorance. It consists of failing to realize and to understand that
life is evil and meaningless. For the most part, people in this category are women, or they are very
young or very stupid men; they still have not understood the problem of life that presented itself to
Schopenhauer, Solomon, and the Buddha. They see neither the dragon that awaits them nor the mice
gnawing away at the branch they cling to; they simply lick the drops of honey. But they lick these drops
of honey only for the time being; something will turn their attention toward the dragon and the mice, and
there will be an end to their licking. There was nothing for me to learn from them, since we cannot cease
to know what we know.
The second escape is that of epicureanism. Fully aware of the hopelessness of life, it consists of
enjoying for the present the blessings that we do have without looking at the dragon or the mice; it lies
in licking the honey as best we can, especially in those places where there is the most honey on the bush.
Solomon describes this escape in the following manner:
'And I commended mirth, for there is nothing better for man under the sun than to eat, drink, and be
merry; this will be his mainstay in his toil through the days of his life that God has given him under the
sun.
So go and eat your bread with joy and drink your wine in the gladness of your heart. . . . Enjoy life
with a woman you love through all the days of your life of vanity, through all your vain days; for this is
your fate in life and in the labors by which you toil under the sun. . . . Do whatever you can do by the
strength of your hand, for there is no work in the grave where you are going, no reflection, no
knowledge, no wisdom.'
Most people of our class pursue this second means of escape. The situation in which they find
themselves is such that it affords them more of the good things in life than the bad; their moral stupidity
enables them to forget that all the advantages of their position are accidental, that not everyone can have
a thousand women and palaces, as Solomon did; they forget that for every man with a thousand wives
there are a thousand men without wives, that for every palace there are a thousand men who built it by
the sweat of their brows, and that the same chance that has made them a Solomon today might well
make them Solomon's slave tomorrow. The dullness of the imagination of these people enables them to
forget what left the Buddha with no peace: the inevitability of sickness, old age, and death, which if not
today then tomorrow will destroy all these pleasures. The fact that some of these people maintain that
their dullness of thought and imagination is positive philosophy does not, in my opinion, distinguish
them from those who lick the honey without seeing the problem. I could not imitate these people, since I
did not lack imagination and could not pretend that I did. Like every man who truly lives, I could not
turn my eyes away from the mice and the dragon once I had seen them.
The third means of escape is through strength and energy. It consists of destroying life once one has
realized that life is evil and meaningless. Only unusually strong and logically consistent people act in
this manner. Having realized all the stupidity of the joke that is being played on us and seeing that the
blessings of the dead are greater than those of the living and that it is better not to exist, they act and put
an end to this stupid joke; and they use any means of doing it: a rope around the neck, water, a knife in
the heart, a train. There are more and more people of our class who are acting in this way. For the most
part, the people who perform these acts are in the very prime of life, when the strength of the soul is at
its peak and when the habits that undermine human reason have not yet taken over. I saw that this was
the most worthy means of escape, and I wanted to take it.
The fourth means of escape is that of weakness. It consists of continuing to drag out a life that is evil
and meaningless, knowing beforehand that nothing can come of it. The people in this category know
254 








that death is better than life, but they do not have the strength to act rationally and quickly put an end to
the delusion by killing themselves; instead they seem to be waiting for something to happen. This is the
escape of weakness, for if I know what is better and have it within my reach, then why not surrender
myself to it? I myself belonged in this category.
Thus the people of my class save themselves from a terrible contradiction in these four ways. No
matter how much I strained my intellectual faculties, I could see no escape other than these four."477
Tolstoy's "intellectual faculties" - his rationality - could see no way out of the dilemma posed by his
incorporation of an "indigestible idea." Furthermore, logic clearly dictated that existence characterized only
by inevitable and pointless suffering should be brought to an abrupt end, as an "evil joke." It was Tolstoy's
clear apprehension of the endless conflict between the individual and the conditions of existence that
destroyed his ability to work - that undermined his desire to live. He was unable to see (at least at that point
in his journey along the way) that man was fashioned to confront chaos, constantly - to eternally work
towards transforming it into real being - rather than to master it finally, once and for all (and to therefore
render everything intolerably static!).
The fact of mortal vulnerability - that defining characteristic of the individual, and the "reason" for his
emergent disgust with life - may be rendered even more "unjust" and "intolerable" by the specific
manifestations of such vulnerability. Some are poorer than others, some weaker, some uglier - all less able,
in some regard (and some apparently less able in all regards). Recognition of the apparently arbitrary
distribution of skill and advantage adds additional rationally "justifiable" grounds for the development of a
philosophy based on resentment and antipathy - sometimes, "on behalf" of an entire class, other times,
sheerly for the purposes of a specific individual. Under such circumstances, the desire for "revenge on life
itself" may become paramount above all else - particularly for the "unfairly oppressed." Shakespeare's
crippled Richard the Third speaks for all "revolutionaries," all "rebels," so motivated:
"Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so,
Let hell make crooked my mind to answer it.
I have no brother, I am like no brother:
And this word "love" which greybeards call divine,
Be resident in men like one another
And not in me: I am myself alone."478
Evil is voluntary rejection of the process that makes life tolerable, justified by observation of life's
terrible difficulty. This rejection is presumptious, premature, because it is based on acceptance of a
provisional judgment, as final: "everything is insufficient, and is therefore without worth, and nothing
whatsoever can be done to rectify the situation." Judgment of this sort precludes all hope of cure. Lack of
belief in hope and meaning (which appear more than willing to vanish, in the face of rationale critique)
seldom means commensurate "lack of belief in anxiety and despair" (even though recognition of the
pointlessness of everything should also undermine one's faith in suffering). Suffering cannot be disbelieved
away, however: rejection of the process that constantly renews the positive aspect of the "constituent
elements of experience" merely ensures that their negative counterparts gain the upper hand. Such
additional torture - added to that already considered sufficient to bring about hatred for life - is sure to
produce a character motivated to perform worse acts than mere suicide. The development of the adversary
therefore follows a predictable path, from pride ("Pride and worse Ambition threw me me down"479),
through envy, to revenge480 - to the ultimate construction of a character possessed by infinite hatred and
envy:
"To do aught good never will be our task,
But ever to do ill our sole delight,
As being contrary to his high will
Whom we resist. If then his Providence
Out of our evil seeks to bring forth good,
Our labor must be to pervert that end,
And out of good still to find means of evil."481
255 











Tolstoy's nihilism - disgust with the individual and human society, combined with the desire for the
eradication of existence - is one logical "evil" consequence of heightened self-consciousness. It is not,
however, the only consequence, and may not even be the most subtle. Far more efficient - far more hidden
from the perpetrator himself, and from his closest observers - is heightened identification with tradition and
custom. This is envelopment in the guise of patriotism, to facilitate the turning of state power towards
destruction. Nietzsche described such "loyalty" in the following manner:
"Definition of morality: Morality - the idiosyncrasy of decadents, with the ulterior motive of revenging
oneself against life - successfully. I attach value to this definition."482
This description of initial motivated decision and consequent dissolution seems to me to characterize the
processes and "bifurcated" final state of moral (and, therefore, psychological) degeneration more accurately
and potently than any purely "scientific" theory of psychopathology generated to date. Of course, we are at
present unable to take our rationally-reduced selves seriously enough to presume a relationship between
evil as a "cosmic force" and our petty transgressions and self-betrayals. We believe that in reducing the
scope and importance of our errors, we are properly humble; in truth, we are merely unwilling to bear the
weight of our true responsibility.
5.2.1. The Adversary in Action: Voluntary Degradation of the Map of Meaning
"Who alone has reason to lie himself out of actuality?
He who suffers from it."483
Tragic encounter with the forces of the unknown is inevitable, in the course of normal development, given
continued expansion of conscious awareness. Even socialized identification with the cultural canon cannot
provide final protection. "Unshielded" personal contact with tragedy is inextricably linked with emergence
of self-consciousness, which has as its mythic consequence (has as its virtual equivalent) heightened
awareness of human limitation. This awareness is manifested in shame, and has been expressed
mythologically as shame of nakedness, which is knowledge of essential vulnerability and weakness before
the world.
The intrinsic nature of human experience ensures that potent motivation for deceitful adaptation is
always present. It is the encounter with what is truly horrible and terrifying, after all, that inspires fear and
engenders avoidance. The human tendency to flee into false havens of security can therefore be viewed
with sympathy and understanding. Maturation is a frightening process. Transformation from the paradisal
matriarchal world of childhood to the fallen masculine, social world is fraught with peril - to say nothing of
the dangers of post-apprenticeship individuality. It is not easy to become an adolescent, after being a child.
It might be said that this transition is in itself a heroic act. It therefore happens, upon occasion, that those
who have abandoned heroism as a style of adaptation do not take even this first step. The relative
advantages that accompany increased freedom may seem frightening and of dubious value, given the
comparative responsibility and lack of security that are part and parcel of maturity.
As maturation takes place, the "environment" transforms. As the developing individual masters his
powers, his behavioral capacity expands. He can do more things and, in consequence, experience more
things. The ability to bring heretofore unknown and, therefore, frightening phenomena into being
constantly increases, and the boundaries of the experiential domain of the individual eventually extend
beyond the area "shielded" by the parents. The capability to endlessly further apprehension is central to the
adaptive capacity of the individual; this capability, however, comes at an immense price, which is
knowledge of finitude and death. Potent motivation therefore exists to resist such development, when it
duly emerges - and to fight desperately for maintenance of childhood ignorance, that previous plateau of
stability, or to hide in the commands of others. Individuality - which is the ability to establish a realm of
experience that is unique to the self, the capacity for the creation of purely subjective experience - also
means acceptance of vulnerability, and mortality. The creative capacity is divine Logos, which in the
256 







course of its development necessitates recognition of the inevitability of failure and death. That is in part
the meaning of the symbol of the Christian crucifixion, which paradoxically melds mortality with divinity -
which is representative of the "mortal god," infinitely creative, responsible, and vulnerable.
Individual existence means bounded existence - bounded in space, and in time. The existence of the
bounds makes experience possible; the fact of the bounds makes experience unbearable. We have been
granted the capacity for constant transcendence, as an antidote, but frequently reject that capacity, because
using it means voluntarily exposing ourselves to the unknown. We run away because we are afraid of the
unknown, at bottom; such fear also makes us cling to our protective social identities, which shield us from
what we do not understand. So, while running away, we necessarily become slave to convention and habit,
and deny the troublesome best within our selves. Why run away? It is fear - fear of the unknown, and its
twin, fear of rejection by the protective social world, which leads to pathological subjugation of unique
individual personality; which leads to rejection of the totality of personal being (which, when manifested,
has truly redemptive capability). The Great Father hates innovation and will kill to prevent it; the Great
Mother, source of all new knowledge, has a face that paralyzes when encountered. How can we not run
away, when confronted by such powers? - but running away means that everything worthwhile ages, then
dies.
When a child is born, he is protected from the vagaries of existence by the benevolence of circumstance,
through maternal presence; the infant is prepared, a priori, instinctively, to respond to such protection, and
to form a relationship - a bond with the mother. The helpless baby is at the mother's mercy; but is
sheltered, as well, from the terrible world. Culture intercedes, in the form of proscriptions for behavior,
when mortality nonetheless threatens, but adherence to such requirements means increased responsibility,
separation from the good mother, and sacrifice of the primary dependent relationship. Culture moulds the
maturing personality, offering knowledge - but limitation at the same time, as the social world mangles
individuality, interest, and meaning.
Spirit is offered up to the group to maintain the group's benevolent nature - to ensure its continued
protection; to ensure its grant of knowledge, derived from history. It is necessary to identify with the group,
in the course of normal development - that identification fosters maturity, and separation from blind
maternal solicitude - but ultimately the group is tyrannical, and demands obedience at the cost of unique
being. This is not to say, naively, that the group is intrinsically evil, that the root of human suffering is
buried in the ground of the social world. Society is more purely expansion of power, which may be directed
according to individual choice. The past contains within it the behavioral wisdom of generations,
established in pain and fear, and offers the possibility of immense expansion of individual power and
ability; culture and civilization offers each individual the opportunity to stand on the shoulders of giants.
Adoption of group identity should constitute apprenticeship, not capitulation; should constitute a
developmental stage in disciplined maturation, requiring temporary subjugation and immolation of
immature individuality, prior to its later re-emergence, in controllable form, under voluntary direction.
Group membership, social being, represents a necessary advance over childish dependence, but the spirit
of the group requires its pound of flesh. Absolute identification with a group means rejection of individual
difference: means rejection of "deviation," even "weakness," from the group viewpoint; means repression
of individuality, sacrifice of the mythic fool - abandonment of the simple and insufficient "younger
brother." The group, of course, merely feels that it is doing its duty by insisting upon such sacrifice;
believes, with sufficient justification, that it is merely protecting its structure. However, the group is not
capable of making final judgments, regarding what is necessary - regarding what is good and what is evil -
because it is incomplete by its very nature; because it is a static structure, composed of the past. Individual
difference, even weakness - anathema to the absolutist - is strength, from a more inclusive viewpoint; is
that force capable of transcending inevitable group limitation, and then of extending the reach of all.
Absolutists, rejecting the necessity of all change, necessarily deny to themselves and others even their
own strength, because true heroism, regardless of its source, has the capacity to upset the status quo.
Through such denial the absolutist hopes to find protection from his individual vulnerability. In truth,
however, he has suppressed and pathologized the sole element within himself that could actually provide
such protection; undermined his ability to utilize the sole process capable of actually providing security and
freedom:
257 






"A traveler who had seen many countries and peoples and several continents was asked what human
traits he had found everywhere; and he answered: men are inclined to laziness. Some will feel that he
might have said with greater justice: they are all timorous. They hide behind customs and opinions. At
bottom, every human being knows very well that he is in this world just once, as something unique, and
that no accident, however strange, will throw together a second time into a unity such a curious and
diffuse plurality: he knows it, but hides it like a bad conscience - why? From fear of his neighbor who
insists on convention and veils himself with it.
But what is it that compels the individual human being to fear his neighbor, to think and act herdfashion,
and not to be glad of himself? A sense of shame, perhaps, in a few rare cases. In the vast
majority it is the desire for comfort, inertia - in short, that inclination to laziness of which the traveler
spoke. He is right: men are even lazier than they are timorous, and what they fear most is the troubles
with which any unconditional honesty and nudity would burden them.
Only artists hate this slovenly life in borrowed manners and loosely fitting opinions and unveil the
secret, everybody's bad conscience, the principle that every human being is a unique wonder; they dare
to show us the human being as he is, down to the last muscle, himself and himself alone - even more,
that in this rigorous consistency of his uniqueness he is beautiful and worth contemplating, as novel and
incredible as every work of nature, and by no means dull.
When a great thinker despises men, it is their laziness that he despises: for it is on account of this that
they have the appearance of factory products and seem indifferent and unworthy of companionship or
instruction. The human being who does not wish to belong to the mass must merely cease being
comfortable with himself; let him follow his conscience, which shouts at him: "Be yourself! What you
are at present doing, opining, and desiring, that is not really you."484
Denial of unique individuality turns the wise traditions of the past into the blind ruts of the present.
Application of the letter of the law when the spirit of the law is necessary makes a mockery of culture.
Following in the footsteps of others seems safe, and requires no thought - but it is useless to follow a welltrodden
trail when the terrain itself has changed. The individual who fails to modify his habits and
presumptions as a consequence of change is deluding himself - is denying the world - is trying to replace
reality itself with his own feeble wish. By pretending things are other than they are, he undermines his own
stability, destabilizes his future - transforms the past from shelter to prison.
The individual embodiment of collective past wisdom is turned into the personification of inflexible
stupidity by means of the lie. The lie is straightforward, voluntary rejection of what is currently known to
be true. Nobody knows what is finally true, by definition, but honest people make the best possible use of
their experience. The moral theories of honest people - however incomplete from some hypothetical
transcendent perspective - account for what they have seen and for who they are, insofar as that has been
determined, in the course of diligent effort. It is not necessary, to define truth, to have seen and heard
everything - that would make truth itself something impossible. It is only necessary to have represented
and adapted to what has been seen and heard - to have represented and adapted to those phenomena
characterizing the natural and social worlds, as encountered, and the self, as manifested. This is to say,
merely, that the truth of children and adults differs, because their experience - their reality - differs. The
truthful child does not think like an adult: he thinks like a child, with his eyes open. The adult, however,
who still uses the morality of the child - despite his adult capacities - he is lying, and he knows it.
The lie is willful adherence to a previously functional schema of action and interpretation - a moral
paradigm - in spite of new experience, which cannot be comprehended in terms of that schema; in spite of
new desire, which cannot find fulfillment within that previous framework. The lie is willful rejection of
information apprehended as anomalous on terms defined and valued by the individual doing the rejection.
That is to say: the liar chooses his own game, sets his own rules, and then cheats. This cheating is failure to
grow, to mature; is rejection of the process of consciousness itself.
The lie is therefore not so much a sin of commission, in most cases, as a sin of omission (although it
may take the former condition as well). The lie is a matter of voluntary failure to explore, and to update.
The appearance of an anomalous occurrence in the ongoing stream of experience only indicates that the
258 






present goal-directed schema within which behavior is being undertaken and evaluated is characterized by
the presence of a flaw. The "place" of the flaw, the reasons for its existence, the "meaning" of the flaw (its
potential for altering interpretation and behavior) - that is all something hypothetical, at the first stage of
anomaly emergence and analysis. The unknown has to be "mined" for precise significance, before it can be
said to have been experienced, let alone comprehended; has to be transformed, laboriously, from pure
affect into revision of presumption and action (into "psyche" or "personality"). "Not doing" is therefore the
simplest and most common lie: the individual can just "not act," "not investigate," and the pitfalls of error
will remain unmanifest - at least temporarily. This rejection of the process of creative exploration means
lack of effortful update of procedural and declarative memory; means adaptation to the present, as if it still
were the past; means refusal to think. The rectification of error is, after all, not inevitable; it is neither
effortless nor automatic. Mediation of order and chaos requires courage and work.
Adoption of identity with the heroes of the past - necessary, but with implicit pathological potential - is
transformed into certain corruption, when the identified individual is a liar, who has voluntarily rendered
himself incapable of personal heroism. Adoption of group identity and position means access to the power
embodied in the past - means access to the collective strength and technical ability of the culture. This
power is terribly dangerous, in cowardly and deceitful hands. The liar cannot see any value in weakness or
deviance, in himself or others - only the potential for chaos - and he cannot see any value in chaos or
uncertainty. He has no sympathy or patience for or appreciation of his own weaknesses - or his own
strengths - and can therefore have none for the weakness or strength of others. The liar can only pretend to
embody what is best of the past, in consequence, because he cannot support or tolerate the presence of
necessary deviance in the present. This means that the liar is a tyrant, because he cannot stand being a fool.
The liar cannot tolerate anomaly, because it provokes anxiety - and the liar does not believe that he can
or should withstand anxiety. This means that he is motivated to first avoid and then to actively suppress any
behavioral pattern or experience of world that does not fit comfortably into his culturally-determined
system of affect-regulating moral presuppositions. Avoidance means that anomalous experience is kept
"unconscious," so to speak - which means incompletely realized. The implications of the dangerous
thought remain unconsidered; the presence of the threatening fantasy remains unadmitted; the existence of
the unacceptable personal action remains unrecognized. Active suppression does not mean intrapsychic
"repression," in the classic sense, but aggressive action undertaken in the world, to forcibly eliminate
evidence of error. This may mean treachery, spiritual cruelty, or the outright application of power: may
mean application of whatever maneuver is presumed necessary, to destroy all indication of insufficiency.
The bearer of bad news therefore inevitably suffers at the hand of the deceitful individual, who would
rather kill the source of potential wisdom than benefit from its message.
The lie is easy, and rewarding, as it allows for the avoidance of anxiety - at least in the short term. In the
long run, however, the lie has terrible consequences. The "avoidance or suppression" of novel or
unexpected experience, which is the abstract equivalent of running away, transforms it perforce into
determinate threat (is the categorical equivalent of labelling as threat). The domain of unprocessed novelty,
defined prima facie by inaction and avoidance as "threat too intolerable to face," expands inevitably with
time, when the past is held as absolute. More and more experience is therefore rendered intolerable,
inexplicable, and chaotic, as the cumulative effects of using the lie as a mode of adaptation inexorably
manifest themselves. The lie transforms culture into tyranny, change into danger, while sickening and
restricting the development and flexibility of adaptive ability itself. Reliance on the lie ensures - as fears
grows - heightened, pathologized identification with the past (manifested as fascism, as personal and
political intolerance), or decadent degeneration (manifested as nihilism, as personal and social
deterioration).
Identification with the spirit of denial eventually makes life unbearable, as everything new - and,
therefore, everything defining hope - comes to be axiomatically regarded as punishment and threat; makes
life unbearable, as the realm of acceptable action shrinks inexorably. The attendant and unavoidable
suffering experienced in consequence generates the desire for - and motivates actions predicated on the
attainment of - the end of all experience, as compensation and revenge for sterility, absence of meaning,
anxiety, hatred and pain:

"The Marabout draws a large circle in the dirt, which represents the world. He places a scorpion,
symbolic of man, inside the circle. The scorpion, believing it has achieved freedom, starts to run around
the circle - but never attempts to go outside. After the scorpion has raced several times around the inside
edge of the circle, the Marabout lowers his stick and divides the circle in half. The scorpion stops for a
few seconds, then begins to run faster and faster, apparently looking for a way out, but never finding it.
Strangely enough, the scorpion does not dare to cross over the line. After a few minutes, the Marabout
divides the half circle. The scorpion becomes frantic. Soon the Marabout makes a space no bigger than
the scorpion's body. This is "the moment of truth." The scorpion, dazed and bewildered, finds itself
unable to move one way or another. Raising its venomous tail, the scorpion turns rapidly 'round and
'round in a veritable frenzy. Whirling, whirling, whirling until all of its spirit and energy are spent. In
utter hopelessness the scorpion stops, lowers the poisonous point of its tail, and stings itself to death. Its
torment is ended."

Figure 58: The Vicious Circle of the Adversary.
The individual who lives by the lie continually shrinks his domain of competence - his "explored and
familiar territory." Eventually, in consequence, he has nowhere left to turn - except to himself. But his own
personality has, in the meantime, become shrunken and inept, as a consequence of underdevelopment - as a
consequence of repeated failure to participate in the process that turns "precosmogonic matter" into "spirit"
and "world." Nothing remains but weakness, resentment, hatred and fear. Thus the chaos that is rejected, in
consequence of the desire for too much security, attains its inevitable victory. The "vicious circle" created
by the liar spirals down inevitably to the "underworld." This process is schematically represented in Figure
58: The Vicious Circle of the Adversary.
260 







The "patriarchal" system, the known, is the concrete consequence of past adaptation, the hierarchically
integrated and represented residue of the heroic past. Such adaptation is necessarily incomplete, in that the
full scope of "natural" phenomena always exceeds the capacity for interpretation. Absolutist application of
the past, motivated by fear of the unknown, transforms the past perforce into tyranny, which does not
tolerate inevitable individual or deviant experience. This process of "absolute ancestral deification" is the
consequence of security-seeking, made necessary by the abandonment of individual heroism as a potential
mode of adaptation. Such abandonment occurs as a consequence of premature and arrogant self-definition -
definition that makes of evident human vulnerability final and sufficient evidence both for the unbearable
cruelty of God and the uselessness of man.
The constant search for security, rather than the embodiment of freedom, is wish for rule by law's letter,
rather than law's spirit. The resultant forcible suppression of deviance is based upon desire to support the
pretence that the unknown does not exist. This suppression has as its consequence the elimination of
creative transformation from the individual and social spheres. The individual who denies his individual
identification with the heroic will come to identify with and serve the tyrannical force of the past - will also
come to suffer the consequence of that identification and service. This consequence is aptly illustrated by
the mythic story of Judas. Judas sacrifices Christ, the hero, to the authorities of tradition - for all the best
reasons - and then destroys himself, in despair:
Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and
brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,
Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? see
thou to that. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged
himself. (Matthew 27:3-5).
Sacrifice of the hero to the great and terrible father means abandonment of identification with the process
that makes cosmos out of chaos. Rejection of the process whereby the endlessly negative and terrifying is
transformed into the acceptable and beneficial means, by definition, the end of all hope:
Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.
And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosover
speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world
to come. (Matthew 12:31-32).
The individual lies to convince himself, and others, that he embodies the greatness of the past. He
pretends to be upright and courageous, instead of acting morally and bravely. Truly courageous actions
might turn the group against him, and it is only identity with that group that keeps his head above water.
The lie means denial of self, means the abandonment of mythic identity with God, means certain
involuntary "revolutionary" collapse, in time. The lie means conscious refusal to modify and reconfigure
historically-predicated behavior and belief to incorporate novelty and alleviate threat.
Endless failure to voluntarily update means the generation of a morass, around the individual, where the
"water of life" once existed: means transformation of what could be life-giving water into a deadly swamp,
composed of past errors, unresolved traumas, and current difficulties. This is the domain characterized by
Freud as the "unconscious," into which "repressed memories" are cast. But unprocessed information is not
precisely memory. That which has not yet been explored is not yet memorable - not yet even "real." The
consequence of untaken action is more accurately "potential from which 'spirit' and 'world' could be
constructed" - much of it implicit in the world as it currently exists (instead of "stored in memory").
(Implicit, that is, in the form of as-of-yet unencountered but latent "trouble" - in the form of the
unanswered letter, the unpaid debt, and the unresolved dispute).
This self-generated swamp grows increasingly impenetrable, as time passes inexorably onward;
becomes increasingly "uninhabitable," as the consequences of long-term avoidance propagate (as the
monsters of the bog sprout new and hungry heads). This "accumulation of precosmogonic potential" is
tantamount to reanimation of the dragon of chaos (is precisely equivalent to the re-awakening of Tiamat,
who eternally sleeps, under the secure and familiar world). The more restricted, fear-bound, faithless and
261 









repressive the particular mode of adaptation - that is, the more extreme the lie - the more horrendous,
dangerous, intolerable, and powerful the associated dragon. It is in this manner that attitude comes to define
the world. Every attempt to wish any aspect of experience out of existence transforms it into an enemy.
Every facet of being hidden from the light leads a corrupt and sun-starved existence, underground.
Experience - absolute reality itself, in the final analysis - cannot be denied without consequence; cannot be
merely fantasized out of existence. The enforcement of a wish merely ensures that the information
contained in the denied experience can neither be removed from the domain of threat, nor utilized for
adaptive purposes.
It is possible that we are in fact adapted to the world - that we are adapted to the world as it actually
exists, rather than to the world as we wish it might be. It is possible that our experience contains
information precisely sufficient to insure our happy survival. This means that every task left undone -
every emergent "territory" left unexplored - comprises "latent information" from which "competent
personality" could yet be extracted. If experience is valid as "source of world and spirit" then those
elements of experience that have been avoided or suppressed or devalued may yet contain within them
what is absolutely essential to continued successful existence. Voluntary transformation - voluntary
movement towards "the good" - would therefore mean re-integration of cast-off "material"; would mean
voluntary incorporation of that which appears, at present, indigestible. The alternative to this "voluntary
pursuit of the inedible" is eventual psychological catastrophe, at the social or individual level, engendered
through involuntary contact with the "hostile forces" of rejected being. From the mythological perspective,
this psychological catastrophe is accidental reunion with the terrible mother, on territory of her choosing.
This "Oedipal incest" culminates in certain suffering, on the part of the unwilling "hero": culminates in
suicide, dismemberment, castration - ends in the final sacrifice of "masculine" consciousness, and in the
victory of the underworld.
The identity of the individual with his culture protects him from the terrible unknown, and allows him to
function as an acceptable member of society. This slavish function strengthens the group. But the group
states that certain ways of thinking and acting are all that are acceptable, and these particular ways do not
exhaust the unknown and necessary capabilities of the human being. The rigid grinning social mask is the
individual's pretence that he is "the same person" as everyone else (that is, the same dead person) - that he
is not a natural disaster, not a stranger, not strange - that he is not deviant, weak, cowardly, inferior and
vengeful. The true individual, however - the honest fool - stands outside the protective enclave of
acceptance, unredeemed - the personification of weakness, inferiority, vengefulness, cowardice, difference.
He cannot make the cut, and because he cannot make the cut, he is the target of the tyranny of the group
(and of his own judgment, insofar as he is that group). But man as a fool, weak, ignorant and vulnerable, is
what the group is not: a true individual, truly existing, truly experiencing, truly suffering (if it could only be
admitted). Consciousness of intrinsic personal limitation, and apprehension of its consequences, brings with
it clear definition of the nature of subjective experience, when allowed to surface, and fosters attempts to
adapt to that experience. It is for this reason that only the unredeemed - the outcast, the sick, the blind, and
the lame - can be "saved." Apprehension of the true nature of subjective experience - of individual reality,
outside the delusionary constraints of the group - is of sufficient power to demoralize, absolutely. The
eternal consequence of self-consciousness is therefore the expulsion from paradise - in its maternal and
patriarchal forms. But such a fall is a step on the way to the "true paradise" - is a step towards adoption of
identity with the hero, who is not protected from the vagaries of existence, but who can actively transform
the terrible unknown into the sustenant and productive world. Acceptance (at least recognition) of the
mortal limitation characterizing human experience therefore constitutes the precondition for proper
adaptation. The lie, which denies individual experience, is denial of the fool - but the fool is the truth.
Acceptance of mortal weakness is the paradoxical humility that serves as a precondition for true
heroism. The heroic attitude is predicated on the belief that something new and valuable still exists, to be
encountered and assimilated, regardless of the power and stability of the current position. This belief is
further based upon faith in human potential - upon faith that the individual spirit will respond to challenge,
and flourish. Such belief must be posited - voluntarily, freely - prior to participation in any heroic
endeavor. This is the necessary leap that makes courageous and creative action possible; that makes
religion something real. Humility means, therefore: I am not yet what I could be - an adage both cautious
and hopeful.
262 






The adversarial position, deceit, is predicated on the belief that the knowledge of the present is all
necessary knowledge - is predicated on the belief that the unknown has finally been conquered. This belief
is equivalent to denial of vulnerability, equivalent to the adoption of omniscience - "what I do is all there is
to do, what I know is all there is to know." Inextricably associated with the adoption of such a stance is
denial, implicit or explicit, of the existence, the possibility, and the necessity of the heroic - as everything
worthwhile has already been done, as all problems have been solved by the "ancestral heroes," who
predeceased us, as paradise has already been spread before us. This is a terrible position, as the axiom of
faith "we are redeemed" makes human suffering itself (which can never be eradicated, as a consequence of
ideological identification) something heretical - something that can exist only as an insult to the guardians
of traditional order. The authoritarian is thereby necessarily stripped of his empathy, even for himself: in
the "perfect world" - presently extant - nothing imperfect may be allowed to exist. So the adversary backs
himself into a position where he cannot admit even to his own misery (let alone the misery of others). A
more hopeless position can not possibly be imagined.
Acceptance of insufficiency paradoxically catalyzes identification with the hero, and opens up the
possibility of participation in the process of creation and renewal. Rejection of insufficiency produces, by
contrast, identification with the adversary, whose eternal dwelling place is hell. This hell is something
whose nature can be rendered explicitly comprehensible, despite its mythological character - is something
that has familiar and defined features; is something that can be understood, first and foremost, as a
consequence of the "imbalance of the constituent elements of reality." Adoption with the deceitful or
adversarial mode of adaptation produces (1) an accelerated search for security, and increased likelihood of
aggression, in those cases where identification with the cultural canon is deemed possible, or (2)
degeneration of personality, and decadent breakdown - where the costs of cultural identity are regarded as
"too high," where no such identity is waiting to offer protection, or where even fascistic behavior appears
as something too positive to manifest in the all-too-unbearable world.
Denial of the heroic promotes fascism, absolute identification with the cultural canon. Everything that is
known, is known within a particular historically-determined framework, predicated upon mythologicallyexpressed
assumptions. Denial or avoidance of the unknown therefore concomitantly necessitates
deification of a particular, previously established viewpoint. The way that things are, under such
circumstance, must be the way they forever remain. Questioning the wisdom of the past necessarily
exposes the anxiety-provoking unknown once again to view. This exposure of the unknown can be
regarded as beneficial, under those circumstances where positive adaptation to the unknown is viewed as
possible, but only as destructive, where lack of faith in the heroic rules. All that lives, however, grows.
When conservatism destroys the capacity for individual creativity - when it becomes tyranny - then it
works against life, not for it. The "spirit within" has withdrawn from the group afraid to develop. An
absolutely conservative society cannot survive, because the future transcends the limitations of the past,
and the absolute conservative wants to limit what could be to what has already been. If history was
complete, and perfect, if the individual had fully exploited his highest potential, then the human race would
be run, for all would be explored, all known, all accomplished. But this pinnacle of attainment has not yet
been reached - and perhaps never will be. Those who pretend the contrary rapidly come to actively oppose
the very process that delivers what they claim to have already obtained.
Denial of the heroic promotes decadence, equally - absolute rejection of the order of tradition; absolute
rejection of order itself. This pattern of apprehension and behavior seems far removed from that of the
fascist - but the decadent is just as arrogant as his evidently more rigid peer. He has merely identified
himself absolutely with no thing, rather than with one thing. He is rigidly convinced of the belief that
nothing matters - convinced that nothing is of value, despite the opinions of (clearly-deluded, weak and
despicable) others; convinced that nothing is worth the effort. The decadent functions in this manner like an
anti-Midas - everything he touches turns to ashes.
Under normal circumstances, the individual who reaches adolescence identifies with the tribe - with the
collective historically-determined structure designed to deal with threat. The normal individual solves his
problem of adaptation to the unknown by joining a group. A group, by definition, is composed of those
who have adopted a central structure of value, and who therefore behave, in the presence of other group
members, identically - and if not identically, at least predictably.
263 


The fascist adapts to the group, with a vengeance. He builds stronger and stronger walls around himself,
and those who are "like him," in an ever-more futile attempt to keep the ever-more-threatening unknown at
bay. He does this because his world-view is incomplete. He does not believe in the heroic aspect of the
individual, he does not see the negative aspect of the social world, and he cannot visualize the beneficial
aspect of chaos. He is frightened enough to develop the discipline of a slave, so that he can maintain his
protected position in the group, but he is not frightened enough to transcend his slavish condition. He
therefore remains twisted and bent. The decadent, by contrast, sees nothing but the tyranny of the state.
Since the adversarial aspect of the individual remains conveniently hidden from his view, he cannot
perceive that his "rebellion" is nothing but avoidance of discipline. He views chaos as a beneficial home,
seeing the source of human evil in social regulation, because he cannot imagine the Terrible Mother, as
soul-devouring force. So he abandons his father in the belly of the beast, unredeemed - and has no tools to
rely on when he is finally challenged.
The decadent looks to subvert the process of maturation - looks for a "way out" of group affiliation.
Group membership requires adoption of at-least-adolescent responsibility - at least of the responsibilities
associated with respectable behavior - and this burden may seem too much to bear, as a consequence of
prolonged immaturity of outlook. The decadent therefore acts "as if" the paradigmatic structure of the
group has been rendered "insufficient" - as a consequence of environmental, cultural or intellectual change
- and refuses to be the fool who risks belief. The "proper" response to "the illness of the father," is, of
course, "the journey to the land of living water." The decadent makes his intellectual superiority to the
"superstitious of the past" an article of faith, instead, and shirks his responsibility. [That is to say - it is the
desire to shirk that responsibility (and the "heroic sacrifice" it entails), that constitutes motivation for belief
in "intellectual superiority."] The "suffering rebel" stance that such adoption allows, as a secondary
consequence, also serves admirably as mask for cowardice.
The fascist and the decadent regard each other as opposites, as mortal enemies. They are in actuality two
sides of a bent coin:
"Today is Christmas day, and I have just come home from July's. While I was there it struck me, as I sat
on their couch between the two girls, just how foolish and idiotic I have been in this my only life. I hope
you will have patience while I unburden myself on you, because I need desperately to confess my sins to
someone, and I know that if I were sitting in a little cubicle talking to an unseen clergyman I wouldn't
do a proper job of it. You fit the definition of a religious man as someone who gives careful
consideration to the demonic and irrational in humanity, so I think you will find my confession
interesting.
Imagine if you can a grown man who harbors in his heart the most vicious resentment for his fellow
man, his neighbor, who is guilty of nothing more than embodying a superior consciousness of what it
means to be a man. When I think of all the black, scathing thoughts I have directed at those who I could
not look in the eye, it is almost unbearable. All of my lofty disdain for the 'common' man, who, so I
thought, was guilty of the sin of unconsciousness, was, I now realize, founded on nothing more than
jealousy and spite. I hated, I absolutely loathed anyone who had wrestled with their fear of leaving the
maternal confines of a childish mentality and won their battle, only because I had not done so. I equated
independence and success with egotism and selfishness, and it was my fondest hope, my highest
ambition, to witness and participate in the destruction of everything that successful, independent people
had built for themselves. This I considered a duty. In fact there was a decidedly fanatical element in my
urge to cleanse the world of what I perceived to be selfishness.
Think what would have happened if I had been in a position to realize my fine feelings! The memory
makes me fear that any moment the earth will crack open and swallow me up, because if there is any
justice it would. I, who had not the faintest inkling of a capacity for moral judgment, traipsing around
passing judgment on anyone who dared cross my path. It makes me wonder that I have even one friend
in this world. But of course I had friends before. Anyone with enough self-contempt that they could
forgive me mine.
It is fortunate for humanity that there are few saviors of the caliber of myself. Did you know that I
used to identify with Christ? I considered myself entirely, immaculately free of aggression and every
other form of anti-social feeling. But what about the hatred I have just now confessed, you ask? That
264 


didn't count. Those feelings were based on sound common sense, you see. After all, there are sons of
bitches in the world, and one needs to be ready for them. (Do I smell ozone? They say you get a tingling
sensation just before the lightning bolt strikes.)
That is a very apt phrase, son of a bitch. There is a passage in Jung's Phenomenology of the Self
which runs: 'Often a mother appears beside him who apparently shows not the slightest concern that her
little son should become a man, but who, with tireless and self-immolating effort, neglects nothing that
might hinder him from growing up and marrying. You now behold the secret conspiracy between
mother and son, and how each helps the other to betray life.' This insight would be useful for me as an
excuse, being a perfectly accurate description of my situation, were it not for the fact that I am almost
daily presented with a residual bit of undiluted evil in myself. For example, when I am faced with a
frustrating situation I do not ask myself what I am going to do about it. I ask myself who is responsible
for it - and I am always ready to conclude that if the other person were to act properly then the problem
would not exist. What is evil about that, you ask? Obviously if I am determined to overlook my own part
in the failure to resolve my own frustrations, if I am determined to find a scapegoat for my problems,
then I am just a stone's throw away from the mentality that was responsible for Hitler's final solution, or
for the Spanish inquisition, or for Lenin's cultural cleansing.
What was it you told me when I complained about the flaws in capitalism, about the fact that so
many people take advantage of the capitalist system? Something like 'the fact that people go on
consolidating their financial position ad nauseum is another problem, but it is no reason to conclude that
there is anything virtuous in refusing to even try to consolidate one's position in the first place.' But it is
so much easier to crown one's cowardice and laziness with the accolade of virtue. Just ask Lenin's
henchmen, who swaggered around the countryside robbing every farmer who had managed any success
whatever, and called themselves friends of the common people and patted each other on the back for
their moral uprightness! I wonder if I have changed so much that I would not join them when put to the
test. The idea that morality stems from a lack of personal interests is thoroughly ingrained in my mind.
"Good people are those who don't want anything for themselves" is the way I think. But I never ask
myself why such a person should put any effort into disciplining himself, or take any pains to keep his
motives clear in his own mind, because there is nothing of value to him in this world.
In his essay Relations Between the Ego and the Unconscious Jung says that in an unconscious state
the individual is torn by the conflict of opposites, and that achieving consciousness involves resolving
that conflict on a higher level. (I understand that this particular state of adult unconsciousness is
different from the original state of child-like unconsciousness, in which there is no long-term conflict.)
Just last week I was stuck in that dead-end again. I was sitting and thinking about what course my life
should be taking, and at every imagined scenario of a fulfilling or meaningful activity I was met by a
counterpoint coming from somewhere in my head, showing me how this or that aspect of my scenario
was wrong because it would result in this or that problem, to the point where it was unacceptable to
consider any career at all because just by being alive I would contribute to the destruction of the planet.
And as badly as I wanted to refute this echo of wrong to my every imagined right as an irrational
chimera, the fact is, so I told myself, that we see daily in the newspapers how the activities of humanity,
which are also the activities of individual men and women, are causing incalculable harm.
It is of course due to my being influenced by yourself that I do not remain stuck in that particular bog
too long these days. If our industrialism is causing problems, I now answer myself, then I should hope
that there are people out there working to solve those problems, or perhaps I should try to do something
about them myself, but by sitting idly by I do not solve a thing. Of course what is most daunting, and
also most snivelly, about being stuck in that bog is the fact that the rational mind wants to be absolutely
sure about the successful outcome of its life plan, and obviously there is another part of the mind that
knows that such certainty is impossible, so one is then faced with the need to accept on faith that things
will turn out for the better with some luck and perseverance. And being a fine upstanding modern mouse
with an enlightened rational mind, I have no use for faith and other such religious sounding claptrap and
nonsense. Faith is obviously irrational, and I'll not have any irrationality influencing my behavior.
Previously my solution to this problem was to allow chance to make my career choices for me,
letting my own interests influence my decisions as little as possible, and I then believed that I had
somehow avoided personal responsibility for the state of the modern world, because I was not really
265 


responsible for the state of my life, and that I had escaped from the possibility that my plans wouldn't
work out because I had no plans. It was on this rock-solid foundation that I looked out at the world, and
saw around me people who were stupid enough to add their own selves into the equation.
To put this kind of faith in oneself, to believe that there exists inside of oneself a motive force, call it
an interest, which will respond to life and carry one through uncertainty and adversity is an irrational
attitude without equal, and it is with this irrational approach to life that the conflict of the opposites is
resolved, it seems to me. But the problem now is this: in order to have this faith in one's irrational nature
one needs proof that personal interests and passions are capable of sustaining one through the
uncertainties and adversities of life that the rational mind foresees so clearly, and the only way to get
that proof is to risk oneself and see the result. It is a very exceptional person who can take such an
undertaking on their own. Most of us need guidance and support from others, from believers, so to
speak. Strange, isn't it, that religious terms should become useful for this discussion?
As I wrote that last paragraph I was suddenly reminded of your idea that the devil as he is represented
in Milton's Paradise Lost is a metaphor for the rational intellect, placed in the position of the highest
psychic authority. 'Better to rule in hell than to serve in heaven.' Hell, then, is a condition in which the
rational mind, with its acute consciousness of the many perils of life, holds sway over the individual and
effectively prevents him from engaging in life, which results in the morally degenerate state of weakness
that I described in the first pages of this letter. And heaven, I presume, would be a condition in which
the rational mind subordinates itself to faith in...in God. But what is God?
You have a chapter in the manuscript of your book titled The Divinity Of Interest. Your ideas are
starting to make sense to me now - at least I think they are. Faith in God means faith in that which
kindles one's interest, and leads one away from the parental sphere out into the world. To deny those
interests is to deny God, to fall from heaven and land squarely in hell, where one's passions burn
eternally in frustration. What was it God said when he cast Adam out of Eden? Something about
working in the dust to the end of his days, with the spectre of death always looming in the future. I can
certainly relate to that. One of the most vivid impressions I get from recalling all those years I spent
moving from one job to the next is the pointlessness of my daily life back then, and the glaring
knowledge that the end was drawing near. But when I'm doing something that has meaning for me,
something that interests me, as I am right now, death seems far away, and work seems quite agreeable,
even joyous."486
This "theory of the genesis of social psychopathology" - this theory of a direct relationship obtaining
between personal choice and fascistic or decadent personality and social movement - finds its precise echo
in Taoist philosophy, and can be more thoroughly comprehended through application of that perspective.
The traditional Taoist believes that profane human experience consists of the differentiated parts of an
essentially uncategorizable background - the Tao (as we have seen before) - which may also be interpreted
as "meaning" or as "the way."487 Tao manifests itself as the eternal flux of being. The "natural categories"
of Yin and Yang, represented in Figure 59: The Constituent Elements of Existence, Reprise, constitute
the most fundamental "divisions" of Tao - comprise the basic maternal and patriarchal constituent elements
of experience. Much of ancient Chinese philosophy (cosmology, medicine, political theory, religious
thinking) is predicated on the idea that pathology is caused by a relative "excess" of one primordial
"substance" or the other. The goal of the Chinese sage - physician, spiritual leader or social administrator -
is to establish or re-establish the harmony between the fundamental "feminine" and "masculine" principles,
and to diagnosis and cure the faulty action or irresponsible inactions that led to their original discord. The
schematic representation of Yin and Yang, portrayed in Figure 59, utilizes the image of a circle to represent
totality; the paisleys that make up that circle are opposed but balanced. The image is rendered additionally
sophisticated by the presence of the white circle in the black paisley, and vice versa. Too much chaos
breeds desire for order; so, Yin may serve as mother to Yang. Conversely - too much order breeds the
desire for novelty, as antidote to stultifying predictability. In this manner, Yang serves as father to Yin.
The fascist - who will not face the reality and necessity of the unknown - hides his vulnerable face in a
"pathological excess of order." The decadent - who refuses to see that existence is not possible without
order - hides his immaturity from himself and others in a "pathological excess of chaos." The fascist is
willing to sacrifice painful freedom for order, and to pretend that his unredeemed misery is meaningless, so

that he does not have to do anything for himself. The decadent believes that freedom can be attained
without discipline and responsibility, because he is ignorant of the terrible nature of "the undifferentiated
ground of reality," and is unwilling to bear the burden of order. When he starts to suffer - as he certainly
will - he will not allow the reality of his suffering to prove to him that some things are real, because
acceptance of that proof would force him to believe and to act (would force him as well towards painful
realization of the counterproductive and wasteful stupidity of his previous position).

Figure 59: The Constituent Elements of Existence, Reprise
The fascistic mode of adaptation is, above all, a method for the direct control of the unknown and
unpredictable. Modern human beings, like the ancients, identify the stranger implicitly with the dragon of
chaos. The stranger acts unpredictably, and thinks unpredictable things - things which might have dramatic
and unsettling effect, if they were allowed full expression. Extreme conservatism allows for restriction of
uncertainty - for evasion of the unknown. It performs this function by insuring that each member of the
group acts, imagines and thinks precisely like every other member (generally, precisely like the leader - a
dark parody of the hero). In times of heightened uncertainty, during periods of increased unemployment or
unsettled political structure, the call for return to the "glorious past" therefore always arises. The fascist -
dominated by his fear - believes that the world should only be order, because disorder is too frightening to
consider. This makes the cosmos he creates - when granted the opportunity - a place of endless sterility
and machine-like organization. This increased conformity allows at least for the temporary alleviation and
restriction of anxiety, but damages the capacity of the group (his group, that is) to respond flexibly to
inevitable change. It is as if - to use a biological metaphor - the fascist strives to force all the genetic
diversity out of his "species." No diversity means no variance in response to new challenges - means one
solution (likely the wrong one) to every problem. The suppression of deviance, of the unknown, therefore
merely ensures its irrepressible emergence in negative guise, at some undetermined point in the future (as
problems ignored do not go away, but get worse, as they follow their own peculiar developmental path).
The order the fascist imposes, therefore, bears within it the seeds of its own destruction.
The fascist tends to be cruel, as well as rigid - will in fact pursue his cruelty, even at the cost of
undermining his own stability. The Nazi persecution of the Jews, for example, continued at an everincreasing
rate (and with ever-more harsh procedures) as it became more and more evidently a burden to
the war effort. Nazi hatred therefore became a force so potent, as the Third Reich developed, that it
267 



overcame Nazi patriotism, motivated by mortal terror of the unknown. Underneath the fascist's professed
patriotism and cowardly love of order is an even more profound phenomenon: hatred for the tragic
conditions of existence, and for the vulnerable life that makes those conditions evident:
For they reasoned unsoundly, saying to themselves, "Short and sorrowful is our life, and there is no
remedy when a man comes to his end,and no one has been known to return from Hades.
Because we were born by mere chance, and hereafter we shall be as though we had never been; because
the breath in our nostrils is smoke, and reason is a spark kindled by the beating of our hearts.
When it is extinguished, the body will turn to ashes, and the spirit will dissolve like empty air. Our name

will be forgotten in time and no one will remember our works; our life will pass away like the traces of a
cloud, and be scattered like mist that is chased by the rays of the sun and overcome by its heat.
For our allotted time is the passing of a shadow, and there is no return from our death, because it is
sealed up and no one turns back.
"Come, therefore, let us enjoy the good things that exist, and make use of the creation to the full as in

youth.
Let us take our fill of costly wine and perfumes, and let no flower of spring pass by us.
Let us crown ourselves with rosebuds before they wither.
Let none of us fail to share in our revelry, everywhere let us leave signs of enjoyment, because this is
our portion, and this our lot.

Let us oppress the righteous poor man; let us not spare the widow nor regard the gray hairs of the aged.
But let our might be our law of right, for what is weak proves itself to be useless. (Wisdom 2:1-11,
RSV).
Fascist cruelty is motivated by the affective consequences of pathologically increased order. When the
"water of life" dries up, nothing is left of existence but its inevitable pains and frustrations, compounded by
terrible boredom. Furthermore, anomaly inevitably accumulates, as order is imposed in an increasingly
strict manner. This adds increased apprehension of chaos to pain, frustration and stultification. Individuals
"subjected" to a surfeit of such emotions "have every reason" to be vengeful, aggressive and cruel - have
placed themselves in a state where the emergence of such motivation is virtually certain.
The unknown appears only when there has been error. The fascist says, "I know everything there is to
know" - and cannot, therefore, make an error. But error is the mother of all things. The inability to admit to
imperfection, therefore, means withdrawal from every informative situation. This means death of continued
adaptation - and certain future re-emergence of the unknown, in negative guise. If you do not change, in
the face of constant slow transformation, then the discrepancies and unresolved errors pile up, and
accumulate. The more stubborn (read: arrogant) you are, the longer the period of time during which this
accretion occurs. Sooner or later so much unknown surrounds you that it is no longer avoidable. At that
point the dragon of the underworld emerges, and swallows you whole. Then you live in the belly of the
beast, in darkness, in the night, in the kingdom of the dead. Hatred comes easily, in such an environment.
The decadent says, "there is no such thing as to know" - and never attempts to accomplish anything.
Like his authoritarian counterpart, he makes himself "immune from error," since mistakes are always made
with regards to some valued, fixed and desired end. The decadent says "look, here is something new,
something inexplicable; that is evidence, is it not, that everything that I have been told is wrong. History is
unreliable; rules are arbitrary; accomplishment is illusory. Why do anything, under such circumstances?"
But he is living on borrowed time - feeding, like a parasite, on the uncomprehended body of the past. If he
works sufficiently hard, and saws off the branch on which he is sitting, then he will fall, too, into the jaws
of the thing he ignored.
The habitual act of avoidance - of rejection - weakens the personality, in a direct causal manner. The
strength of a personality might be defined, in part, as its breadth of explored territory, its capacity to act
appropriately in the greatest number of circumstances. Such strength is evidently dependent upon prior
learning - at least upon learning how to act - and knowledge of how to act is generated and renewed as a
consequence of constant, voluntary, exploratory behavior. If everything new and different is rejected, out of
hand, the personality cannot adjust itself to changing circumstances. Circumstances change inevitably,
however, as a consequence of simple maturation; as a consequence of entropy itself. It is of little use to be
268 


entirely prepared for the past; furthermore, it is only possible to remain prepared for the future, by facing
the present. Anomaly is, therefore, spiritual "food" in the most literal sense: the unknown is the raw
material out of which the personality is manufactured, in the course of exploratory activity. The act of
rejecting anomaly transforms the personality into something starved, something senile, and something
increasingly terrified of change, as each failure to face the truth undermines capacity to face truth in the
future. The man who comes to adopt an inappropriate attitude towards the unknown severs his connection
with the source of all knowledge, undermining his personality, perhaps irreparably. This dissolution of
strength is self-perpetuating: every weakness increases the likelihood of further weakness:
For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he
hath. (Mark 4:25).
The individual who turns away from indications of his own insufficiency increases the probability that he
will seek to repress and destroy all information that indicates threat to current belief. Avoided, suppressed
or otherwise undeveloped elements of personality are not accessible for use in conscious adaptation - will
in fact offer resistance to such adaptation, as a consequence of their "resentment" at being twisted and
ignored. Failure to utilize full human potential severely undermines strength of individual character.
Dissociation of action, imagination and ideation weakens personality. Weakness of personality means
inability to bear the weight of the conscious world. The result of the hypocritical suppression of individual
differences, in the service of the social unit and its intrapsychic representative, is frailty in the face of the
unknown, possibility and chaos:
And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand. (Mark 3:25).
5.2.2. The Adversary In Action: A Twentieth Century Allegory
Jung stated at some point that "any internal state of contradiction, unrecognized, will be played out in the
world as fate." This statement carries with it the apparent stamp of mysticism. How could the world play
out a psychological condition (or the refusal to recognize a psychological condition)? Well, the purpose of
abstraction is to represent experience, and to manipulate the representations, to further successful
adaptation. If we both want the same toy, we can argue about our respective rights to it; if the argument
fails - or if we refuse to engage in it - we can fight. If we are suffering from moral uncertainty, at the
philosophical level - and cannot settle the internal war - then our behavior reflects our inner disquiet, and
we act out our contradictions in behavior, much to our general discredit. Thus the means of settling a
dispute cascade, with each failure, down the chain of abstraction: from the word, to the image, to the deed -
and those who will not let their outdated identities and beliefs die, when they must, kill themselves instead.
Alexander Solzhenitsyn describes how "order and predictability" were thereby established in the Soviet
Union, during Stalin's extensive reign of terror:
"A. B---v has told how executions were carried out at Adak - a camp on the Pechora River. They
would take the opposition members "with their things" out of the camp compound on a prisoner
transport at night. And outside the compound stood the small house of the Third Section. The
condemned men were taken into a room one at a time, and there the camp guards sprang on them. Their
mouths were stuffed with something soft and their arms were bound with cords behind their backs. Then
they were led out into the courtyard, where harnessed carts were waiting. The bound prisoners were
piled on the carts, from five to seven at a time, and driven off to the "Gorka" - the camp cemetery. On
arrival they were tipped into big pits that had already been prepared and buried alive. Not out of
brutality, no. It had been ascertained that when dragging and lifting them, it was much easier to cope
with living people than with corpses.
The work went on for many nights at Adak.
And that is how the moral-political unity of our Party was achieved."488
The invention, establishment and perfection of the concentration camp, the efficient genocidal machine,
might be regarded as the crowning achievement of human technological and cultural endeavor, motivated
269 

by resentment and loathing for life. Invented by the English, rendered efficient by the Germans, applied on
a massive scale by the Soviets and the Chinese, revivified by the Balkan conflict - perfection of the factory
whose sole product is death has required truly multinational enterprise. Such enterprise constitutes,
perhaps, the prime accomplishment of the cooperative bureaucratization of hatred, cowardice and deceit.
Tens of millions of innocent people have been dehumanized, enslaved and sacrificed in these efficient
disassembly lines, in the course of the last century, to help their oppressors maintain pathological stability
and consistency of moral presumption, enforced through terror, motivated by adherence to the lie.
The very name has an uncanny aspect: horrifying, ironical, allegorical. Camp - that is summer sun and
holiday, satirical comedy and masquerade, military rule, obedience and efficiency: death camp - the very
devil's idea of a joke, of camp; black humor and vacation paradise; the dystopian state induced in reality by
diligent pursuit of fantastic ideal, ideological purity, statist heaven on earth. Concentration camp - that is
concentration of people in arbitrary association, restriction of movement and thought to a particular area;
concentration of the processes of human life, distillation, reduction to essence, forcing attention to -
concentration on - the central values underlying human endeavor.
The concentration camp has spawned its own literature; remembrance of survival under conditions as
harsh as imagination can construct - human imagination, capable of positing the existence and describing
the nature of an eternally torturous Hell, with walls seven miles thick, lit by a fire which consumes and
renews flesh, simultaneously, so it can once again be burned away.489 This camp literature has a strange
affective and descriptive consistency - a consequence of the constant re-emergence of patterned, innate
modes of adaptive action and thought, arising naturally in response to experience of overwhelming
anomaly and extreme threat.
Camp life is still human existence, analogous to normal life in all its facets, but made starker, less
ambiguous, clarified, laid bare:
"Pardon me, you... love life? You, you! You who exclaim and sing over and over and dance it too: 'I
love you, life! Oh, I love you, life!' Do you? Well, go on, love it! Camp life - love that too! It too, is
life!
There where there is no struggle with fate,
there you will resurrect your soul...
You haven't understood a thing. When you get there, you'll collapse."490
The extreme nature of camp conditions appears merely to augment tendencies for behavior always present,
under normal conditions - to exaggerate the expression of possibilities innately characteristic of the human
soul.
Camp incarceration, in the typical case, begins with the fall, with arrest: unexpected, unjust, arbitrary,
implacable, and terrifying. The prisoner-to-be starts his involuntary descent into the underworld with his
historically-determined defenses intact, firmly embedded in his cultural context, entrenched in his persona
- identified with his job, his social status, his view of the present, his hopes for the future. The initial
intrusion of fate into this self-deceptive security occurs at night. Arrest takes place without warning, in the
early hours of the morning, when people are easily frightened, dazed and less likely to offer resistance,
more willing to cooperate, in their fear and naive hope - afraid for the security of their nervously gathered
family, standing helpless in their household, at the mercy of state authority, in its most contemptible and
repressive incarnation:
"That's all there is to it! You are arrested!
And you'll find nothing better to respond with than a lamblike bleat: 'Me? What for?'
That's what arrest is: it's a blinding flash and a blow which shifts the present instantly into the past
and the impossible into omnipotent actuality.
That's all. And neither for the first hour nor for the first day will you be able to grasp anything else.
Except that in your desperation the fake circus moon will blink at you: "It's a mistake! They'll set
things right!"
And everything which is by now comprised in the traditional, even literary, image of an arrest will
pile up and take shape, not in your own disordered memory, but in what your family and your
neighbours in your apartment remember: The sharp nighttime ring or the rude knock at the door. The
270 




insolent entrance of the unwiped jackboots of the unsleeping State Security operatives. The frightened
and cowed civilian witness at their backs....
The traditional image of arrest is also trembling hands packing for the victim - a change of
underwear, a piece of soap, something to eat; and no one knows what is needed, what is permitted, what
clothes are best to wear; and the Security agents keep interrupting and hurrying you:
"You don't need anything. They'll feed you there. It's warm there." (It's all lies. They keep hurrying
you to frighten you.)...
The kind of night arrest described is, in fact, a favourite, because it has important advantages.
Everyone living in the apartment is thrown into a state of terror by the first knock at the door. The
arrested person is torn from the warmth of his bed. He is in a daze, half-asleep, helpless, and his
judgment is befogged. In a night arrest the State Security men have a superiority in numbers; there are
many of them, armed, against one person who hasn't even finished buttoning his trousers."491
Arrest means instantaneous depersonalization, isolation from family, friends and social position. This
forcibly-induced shift of context removes, by design, all concrete reminders of group identity, all hallmarks
of social hierarchy, destroys all previous ideals, undermines all goal-directed activity - exposes essential
human vulnerability, and subjects it to ruthless exploitation. The arrested individual is brutally stripped of
every reminder of previous identity, his predictable environment, his conditional hope - left bereft even of
his clothes and hair. He is treated with utmost contempt and derision, regardless of - in spite of - his
previous social status. This complete destruction of social context, of social identity, heightens the newly
arrested individual's sense of self-consciousness, of nakedness and vulnerability. This leaves him
unbearably anxious, tremendously uncertain, miserably subject to a new and uncertain world - to a new
and unpredictable underworld:
"We waited in a shed which seemed to be the anteroom to the disinfecting chamber. SS men appeared
and spread out blankets into which we had to throw all our possessions, all our watches and jewellry.
There were still naive prisoners among us who asked, to the amusement of the more seasoned ones who
were there as helpers, if they could not keep a wedding ring, a medal, or a good-luck piece. No one
could yet grasp the fact that everything would be taken away.
I tried to take one of the old prisoners into my confidence. Approaching him furtively, I pointed to
the roll of paper in the inner pocket of my coat and said, 'Look, this is the manuscript of a scientific
book. I know what you will say; that I should be glad to escape with my life, that that should be all I can
expect of fate. But I cannot help myself. I must keep this manuscript at all costs; it contains my life's
work. Do you understand that?'
Yes, he was beginning to understand. A grin spread slowly over his face, first piteous, then more
amused, mocking, insulting, until he bellowed one word at me in answer to my question, a word that
was ever present in the vocabulary of the camp inmates: 'Shit!' At that moment I saw the plain truth and
did what marked the culminating point of the first phase of my psychological reaction: I struck out the
whole of my former life."492
The arrested individual has no specific sociohistorically-determined intrapsychic structure to protect
himself from the terrible world of incarceration and slavery; no model of desire and expectation to inhibit
his mortal terror, to guide his activity and to channel his hope. He has been forcibly ejected from paradise,
made intolerably aware of his own essential limitations, his own nakedness, has been sentenced to endless
labor and subjugation. In consequence, he has been rendered vulnerable to his worst fears, his most chaotic
psychological states, and his most severe depressions:
"Here is how it was with many others, not just with me. Our initial, first prison sky consisted of black
swirling storm clouds and black pillars of volcanic eruptions - this was the heaven of Pompeii, the
heaven of the Day of Judgment, because it was not just anyone who had been arrested, but I - the center
of this world.
Our last prison sky was infinitely high, infinitely clear, even paler than sky-blue.
We all (except religious believers) began from one point: we tried to tear our hair from our head, but
our hair had been clipped close!... How could we? How could we not have seen those who informed
against us?! How could we not have seen our enemies? (And how we hated them! How could we avenge
271 



ourselves on them?) And what recklessness! What blindness! How many errors! How can they be
corrected? They must be corrected all the more swiftly! We must write... We must speak out... We must
communicate....
But - there is nothing we can do. And nothing is going to save us! At the appropriate time we will
sign Form 206. At the appropriate time the tribunal will read us our sentence, in our presence, or we will
learn it in absentia from the OSO.
Then there begins the period of transit prisons. Interspersed with our thoughts about our future camp,
we now love to recall our past: How well we used to live! (Even if we lived badly.) But how many
unused opportunities there were! How many flowers we left uncrumpled!... When will we now make up
for it? If I only manage to survive - oh, how differently, how wisely, I am going to live! The day of our
future release? It shines like a rising sun!
And the conclusion is: Survive to reach it! Survive! At any price!
This is simply a turn of phrase, a sort of habit of speech: 'at any price.'
But then the words swell up with their full meaning, and an awesome vow takes shape: to survive at

any price.
And whoever takes that vow, whoever does not blink before its crimson burst - allows his own
misfortune to overshadow both the entire common misfortune and the whole world.
This is the great fork of camp life. From this point the roads go to the right and to the left. One of
them will rise, and the other will descend. If you go to the right you lose your life, and if you go to the
left - you lose your conscience."493
Work at a killing pace characterizes concentration camp life - work under conditions made deathly
harsh, for the sake of the sheer aesthetic quality of the misery; senseless labor - mere parody of productive
work494 - accompanied by constant, consciously arranged privation:
"The most ghastly moment of the twenty-four hours of camp life was the awakening, when, at a still
nocturnal hour, the three shrill blows of a whistle tore us pitilessly from our exhausted sleep and from
the longings in our dreams. We then began the tussle with our wet shoes, into which we could scarcely
force our feet, which were sore and swollen with edema. And there were the usual moans and groans
about petty troubles, such as the snapping of wires which replaced shoelaces. One morning I heard
someone, whom I knew to be brave and dignified, cry like a child because he finally had to go to the
snowy marching grounds in his bare feet, as his shoes were too shrunken for him to wear. In those
ghastly moments, I found a little bit of comfort: a small piece of bread which I drew out of my pocket
and munched with absorbed delight."495
"In cold lower than 60 degrees below zero [!], workdays were written off: in other words, on such days
the records showed that the workers had not gone out to work; but they chased them out anyway, and
whatever they squeezed out of them on those days was added to the other days, thereby raising the
percentages. (And the servile Medical Section wrote off those who froze to death on such cold days on
some other basis. And the ones who were left who could no longer walk and were straining every sinew
to crawl along on all fours on the way back to camp, the convoy simply shot, so that they wouldn't
escape before they could come back to get them)."496
No one can immerse himself in description of the consciously-perpetrated horrors of the twentieth
century without recognizing, first, that such evil was perpetrated in large part by the well-socialized and
obedient. No one can come to such recognition - which is self-comprehension, as well - and remain
unimpressed by the power and profundity of literary and mythic representations of the power of evil - of
that living force, that eternally active, transcendent personality, intrapsychically incarnate; of that
permanent aspect of man - every man - dedicated solely, vengefully to destruction, dissolution, suffering
and death:
"O Rose, thou art sick!
The invisible worm

That flies in the night

In the howling storm,

272 

Hath found out thy bed
Of crimson joy

And his dark secret love
Does thy life destroy."497

The Rwandan massacres, the killing fields in Cambodia, the tens of millions dead (by Solzhenitsyn's
estimate) as a consequence of internal repression in the Soviet Union, the untold legions butchered during
China's Cultural Revolution - the Great Leap Forward (!), another black joke, accompanied upon
occasion, in the particular, by devouring of the victim - the planned humiliation and rape of thousands of
Muslim women in Yugoslavia, the holocaust of the Nazis, the carnage perpetrated by the Japanese in
mainland China - such events are not attributable to human kinship with the animal, the innocent animal, or
even by the desire to protect territory, interpersonal and intrapsychic, but by a deep-rooted spiritual
sickness, endemic to mankind - the consequence of unbearable self-consciousness, apprehension of destiny
in suffering and limitation, and pathological refusal to face the consequences thereof.
Man is not merely innately aggressive, a poorly socialized, and therefore uncontrolled predator; at best,
such theory can account for his criminal aggression; it is in fact slavish adherence to the forces of
socialization - to the very principle of domestication itself - that enables him to participate in production of
the most truly efficient and organized of human evils. It was the "discipline" of the Germans, not their
criminality, that made the Nazis fearsome. It was the loyalty, patriotism and commitment of the Soviet and
Chinese communists that enabled the mass persecution and destructive-labor camp elimination of their
countrymen. Neither is man a victim of society, innocent lamb perverted by social forces beyond individual
control. Man created society in his own image; it enables him as much as it corrupts him. Man chooses evil,
for the sake of the evil. Man exults in agony, delights in pain, worships destruction and pathology. Man can
torture his brother, in an ecstasy of pleasure, and dance on his grave. Man despises life, his own weak life,
and the vulnerability of others, and constantly works to lay waste, to undermine, to destroy, to torment, to
abuse and devour.
"From the side we looked like two reddish stones in the field.
Somewhere young men of our age were studying at the Sorbonne or at Oxford, playing tennis during
their ample hours of relaxation, arguing about the problems of the world in student cafes. They were
already being published and were exhibiting their paintings. They were twisting and turning to find
ways of distorting the insufficiently original world around them in some new way. They railed against
the classics for exhausting all the subjects and themes. They railed at their own governments and their
own reactionaries who did not want to comprehend and adopt the advanced experience of the Soviet
Union. They recorded interviews through the microphones of radio reporters, listening all the time to
their own voices and coquettishly elucidating what they wished to say in their last or their first book.
They judged everything in the world with self-assurance, but particularly the prosperity and justice of
our country. Only at some point in their old age, in the course of compiling encyclopedias, would they
notice with astonishment that they could not find any worthy Russian names for our letters - for all the
letters of our alphabet.
The rain drummed on the back of our heads, and the chill crept up our wet backs.
We looked about us. The half-loaded cars had been overturned. Everyone had left. There was no one
in the entire clay pit, nor in the entire field beyond the compound. Out in the gray curtain of rain lay the
hidden village, and even the roosters had hidden in a dry place.
We, too, picked up our spades, so that no one would steal them - they were registered in our names.
And dragging them behind us like heavy wheelbarrows, we went around Matronina's plant beneath the
shed where the empty galleries wound all around the Hoffman kilns that fired the bricks. There were
drafts here and it was cold, but it was also dry. We pushed ourselves down into the dust beneath the
brick archway and sat there.
Not far away from us a big heap of coal was piled. Two zeks498 were digging into it, eagerly seeking
something there. When they found it, they tried it in their teeth, then put it in their sack. Then they sat
themselves down and each ate a similar black-grey lump.
'What are you eating there, fellows?'
273 


'It's 'sea clay.' The doctor doesn't forbid it. It doesn't do any good, but it doesn't do any harm either.
And if you add a kilo of it a day to your rations, it's as if you had really eaten. Go on, look for some;
there's a lot of it among the coal.'
And so it was that right up to nightfall the clay pit did not fulfill its work norms. Matronina gave
orders that we should be left out all night. But... the electricity went out everywhere, and the work
compound had no lights, so they called everyone in to the gatehouse. They ordered us to link arms, and
with a beefed-up convoy, to the barking of dogs and curses, they took us to the camp compound.
Everything was black. We moved along without seeing where it was wet and where the earth was firm,
kneading it all up in succession, losing our footing and jerking one another.
And in the camp compound it was dark. Only a hellish glow came from beneath the burners for
'individual cooking.' And in the mess hall two kerosene lamps burned next to the serving window. And
you could not read the slogan, nor see the double portion of nettle gruel in the bowl, and you sucked it
down with your lips by feel.
And tomorrow would be the same and every day: six cars of red clay - three scoops of black gruel. In
prison, too, we seemed to have grown weak, but here it went much faster. There was already a ringing in
the head. That pleasant weakness, in which it is easier to give in than to fight back, kept coming closer.
And in the barracks - total darkness. We lay there dressed in everything wet on everything bare, and
it seemed it was warmer not to take anything off - like a poultice.
Open eyes looked at the black ceiling, at the black heavens.
Good Lord! Good Lord! Beneath the shells and the bombs I begged you to preserve my life. And
now I beg you, please send me death!"499
It is pleasant to presume that the individuals who constructed, organized and ran the concentration
camps of Germany and the Soviet Union were in some profound manner different from the people that we
know, and love, and are. But there is no reason to make this presumption, except for that convenience and
naive peace of mind.500 The image of the concentration camp guard, much as the inmate, defines the
modern individual. Hell is a bottomless pit, and why? Because nothing is ever so bad that we cannot make
it worse:
"Fire, fire! The branches crackle and the night wind of late autumn blows the flame of the bonfire back
and forth. The compound is dark; I am alone at the bonfire, and I can bring it still some more carpenters'
shavings. The compound here is a privileged one, so privileged that is almost as if I were out in freedom
- this is an Island of Paradise; this is the Marfino 'sharashka' - a scientific institute staffed with
prisoners - in its most privileged period. No one is overseeing me, calling me to a cell, chasing me away
from the bonfire. I am wrapped in a padded jacket and even then it is chilly in the penetrating wind.
But she - who has already been standing in the wind for hours, her arms straight down, her head
drooping, weeping, then growing numb and still. And then again she begs piteously: 'Citizen Chief!
Forgive me! Please forgive me! I won't do it again.'
The wind carries her moan to me, just as if she were moaning next to my ear. The citizen chief at the
gatehouse fires up his stove and does not answer.
This was the gatehouse of the camp next door to us, from which workers came into our compound to
lay water pipes and to repair the old ramshackle seminary building. Across from me, beyond the artfully
intertwined, many-stranded barbed-wire barricade and two steps away from the gatehouse, beneath a
bright lantern, stood the punished girl, head hanging, the wind tugging at her gray work skirt, her feet
growing numb from the cold, a thin scarf over her head. It had been warm during the day, when they had
been digging a ditch on our territory. And another girl, slipping down into a ravine, had crawled her way
to the Vladykino Highway and escaped. The guard had bungled. And Moscow city buses ran right along
the highway. When they caught on, it was too late to catch her. They raised the alarm. A mean, dark
major arrived and shouted that if they failed to catch the girl, the entire camp would be deprived of visits
and parcels for a whole month, because of her escape. And the women brigadiers went into a rage, and
they were all shouting, one of them in particular, who kept viciously rolling her eyes: 'Oh, I hope they
catch her, the bitch! I hope they take scissors and - clip, clip, clip - take off all her hair in front of the
line-up!' (This wasn't something she had thought up herself. This was the way they punished women in
the Gulag.) But the girl who was now standing outside the gatehouse in the cold had sighed and said
274 


instead: 'At least she can have a good time out in freedom for all of us!' The jailer overheard what she
said, and now she was being punished; everyone else had been taken off to the camp, but she had been
set outside there to stand 'at attention' in front of the gatehouse. This had been at 6 PM, and it was now
11 PM. She tried to shift from one foot to another, but the guard stuck out his head and shouted: 'Stand
at attention, whore, or else it will be worse for you!' And now she was not moving, only weeping:
'Forgive me, Citizen Chief! Let me into the camp, I won't do it any more!'
But even in the camp no one was about to say to her: All right, idiot! Come on in!
The reason they were keeping her out there so long was that the next day was Sunday, and she would
not be needed for work.
Such a straw-blond, naive, uneducated slip of a girl! She had been imprisoned for some spool of
thread. What a dangerous thought you expressed there, little sister! They want to teach you a lesson for
the rest of your life!
Fire, fire! We fought the war - and we looked into the bonfires to see what kind of Victory it would
be. The wind wafted a glowing husk from the bonfire.
To that flame and you, girl, I promise: the whole wide world will read about you."501
Who would admit - even to himself: "given the choice, I would be the citizen chief, in preference to the
punished girl?" And - without this admission - there is no reason to change, and no reason to combat the
evil within:
"- for whence
But from the author of all ill could spring

So deep a malice, to confound the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell

To mingle and involve, done all to spite

The great Creator?"502

Faced with the horror of camp life - "It too, is life" - many become corrupted:
"Let us admit the truth: At that great fork in the camp road, at that great divider of souls, it was not the
majority of the prisoners that turned to the right."503
This corruption was not caused by camp conditions, appalling as they were:
"Bread is not issued in equal pieces, but thrown onto a pile - go grab! Knock down your neighbours,
and tear it out of their hands! The quantity of bread issued is such that one or two people have to die for
each that survives. The bread is hung up on a pine tree - go fell it. The bread is deposited in a coal mine
- go down and mine it. Can you think about your own grief, about the past and the future, about
humanity and God? Your mind is absorbed in vain calculations which for the present moment cut you
off from the heavens - and tomorrow are worth nothing. You hate labor - it is your principal enemy.
You hate your companions - rivals in life and death. You are reduced to a frazzle by intense envy and
alarm lest somewhere behind your back others are right now dividing up that bread which could be
yours, that somewhere on the other side of the wall a tiny potato is being ladled out of the pot which
could have ended up in your own bowl."504
Such conditions merely provided the precondition for the emergence of the consequences of decisions
already taken, prior to incarceration, in the large part - decisions to choose security, instead of maintenance
of conscience; to embrace safety, instead of soul:
"In looking at the people, we might see
that in the space twixt birth and death,
one third follow life, and one third death,
and those who merely pass from birth to death,
are also one third of those we see."505

275 

Greed and fear in the everyday world culminates in the same blind inability Solzhenitsyn recognized in the
camps - the same incapacity to think about grief, about the past and future, about man and God - but with
far less evident justification. Fear of mortality, in normal life, is most generally dealt with in the same
manner as in the camp situation: through absolute identification with the system, and consequent rejection
of the self; through acceptance of ideological promise, offer of material security and guarantee of
(unearned) intrapsychic stability:
"My friend Panin and I are lying on the middle shelf of a Stolypin compartment and have set ourselves
up comfortably, tucked our salt herring in our pockets so we don't need water and can go to sleep. But at
some station or other they shove into our compartment... a Marxist scholar! We can even tell this from
his goatee and spectacles. He doesn't hide the fact: he is a former Professor of the Communist Academy.
We hang head down in the square cutout - and from his very first words we see that he is: impenetrable.
But we have been serving time for a long while, and have a long time left to serve, and we value a merry
joke. We must climb down to have a bit of fun! There is ample space left in the compartment, and so we
exchange places with someone and crowd in:
'Hello.'
'Hello.'
'You're not too crowded?'
'No, it's all right.'
'Have you been in the jug a long time?'
'Long enough.'
'Are you past the halfway mark?'
'Just.'
'Look over there: how poverty-stricken our villages are - straw thatch, crooked huts.'
'An inheritance from the Tsarist regime.'
'Well, but we've already had thirty Soviet years.'
'That's an insignificant period historically.'
'It's terrible that the collective farmers are starving.'
'But have you looked in all their ovens?'
'Just ask any collective farmer in our compartment.'
'Everyone in jail is embittered and prejudiced.'
'But I've seen collective farms myself.'
'That means they were uncharacteristic.'
(The goatee had never been in any of them - that way it was simpler.)
'Just ask the old folks: under the Tsar they were well fed, well clothed, and they used to have so
many holidays.'
'I'm not even going to ask. It's a subjective trait of human memory to praise everything in the past.
The cow that died is the one that gave twice the milk. [Sometimes he even cited proverbs!] And our
people don't like holidays. They like to work.'
'But why is there a shortage of bread in many cities?'
'When?'
'Right before the war, for example.'
'Not true! Before the war, in fact, everything had been worked out.'
'Listen, at that time in the all the cities on the Volga there were queues of thousands of people...'
'Some local failure in supply. But more likely your memory is failing you.'
'But there's a shortage now!'
'Old wives' tales. We have from seven to eight billion poods of grain.'
'And the grain itself is rotten.'
'Not at all. We have been successful in developing new varieties of grain.'[...]
And so forth. He is imperturbable. He speaks in a language which requires no effort of the mind. And
arguing with him is like walking through a desert.
It's about people like that that they say: 'He made the rounds of all the smithies and came home
unshod.'
276 
And when they write in their obituaries: 'perished tragically during the period of the cult,' this should
be corrected to read: 'perished comically.'
But if his fate had worked out differently, we would never have learned what a dry, insignificant little
man he was. We would have respectfully read his name in the newspaper. He would have become a
people's commissar or even ventured to represent all Russia abroad.
To argue with him was useless. It was much more interesting to play with him... no, not at chess, but
at the game of 'comrades.' There really is such a game. It is a very simple game. Just play up to him a
couple of times or so, use some of his own pet words and phrases. He will like it. For he has grown
accustomed to find that all around him... are enemies. He has become weary of snarling and doesn't like
to tell his stories because all those stories will be twisted around and thrown right back in his face. But if
he takes you for one of his own, he will quite humanly disclose to you what he has seen at the station:
People are passing by, talking, laughing, life goes on. The Party is providing leadership, people are
being moved from job to job. Yet you and I are languishing here in prison, there are a handful of us, and
we must write and write petitions, begging a review of our cases, begging for a pardon....
Or else he will tell you something interesting: In the Communist Academy they decided to devour
one comrade; they decided he wasn't quite genuine, not one of our own; but somehow they couldn't
manage it: there were no errors in his essays, and his biography was clean. Then all of a sudden, going
through the archives, what a find! They ran across an old brochure written by this comrade which
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin himself had held in his hands and in the margin of which he had written in his
own handwriting the notation: 'As an economist he is shit.' 'Well now, you understand,' our companion
smiled confidentially, 'that after that it was no trouble at all to make short work of that muddlehead and
impostor. He was expelled from the Academy and deprived of his scholarly rank.'
The railroad cars go clicking along. Everyone is already asleep, some lying down, some sitting up.
Sometimes a convoy guard passes along the corridor, yawning.
And one more unrecorded episode from Lenin's biography is lost from view ...."506
Human life is life bounded on all fronts by vulnerability - is life eternally subject to fear for lack of
resources and security of person. Moral knowledge, knowledge of good and evil, is the capability to choose
pattern of adaptation - authoritarian, decadent or creative - in the face of mortal limitation, explicit and
implicit, in camp, and outside:
"Those people became corrupted in camp who had already been corrupted out in freedom or who were
ready for it. Because people are corrupted in freedom too, sometimes even more effectively than in
camp.
The convoy officer who ordered that Moiseyevaite be tied to a post in order to be mocked - had he
not been corrupted more profoundly than the camp inmates who spat on her?
And for that matter did every one of the brigade members spit on her? Perhaps only two from each
brigade did. In fact, that is probably what happened.
Tatyana Falike writes: 'Observation of people convinced me that no man could become a scoundrel
in camp if he had not been one before.'
If a person went swiftly bad in camp, what it might mean was that he had not just gone bad, but that
that inner foulness which had not previously been needed had disclosed itself.
Voichenko has his opinion: 'In camp, existence did not determine consciousness, but just the
opposite: consciousness and steadfast faith in the human essence decided whether you became an animal
or remained a human being.'
A drastic, sweeping declaration!... But he was not the only one who thought so. The artist IvashevMusatov
passionately argued exactly the same thing."507
This corruption - this turning to the left - led some to dissolve, to decay; to fall into the sickness unto
death, despair; to embrace death, with final hope - necessary faith - irrevocably, understandably, crushed
and shattered:
"The prisoner who had lost faith in the future - his future - was doomed. With his loss of belief in the
future, he also lost his spiritual hold; he let himself decline and became subject to mental and physical
277 


decay. Usually, this happened quite suddenly, in the form of a crisis, the symptoms of which were
familiar to the experienced camp inmate. We all feared this moment - not for ourselves, which would
have been pointless, but for our friends. Usually it began with the prisoner refusing one morning to get
dressed and wash to to go out on the parade grounds. No entreaties, no blows, no threats had any effect.
He just lay there, hardly moving. If this crisis was brought about by an illness, he refused to be taken to
the sick-bay or to do anything to help himself. He simply gave up. There he remained, lying in his own
excreta, and nothing bothered him any more.
I once had a dramatic demonstration of the close link between the loss of faith in the future and this
dangerous giving up. F----, my senior block warden, a fairly well-known composer and librettist,
confided in me one day: 'I would like to tell you something, Doctor. I have had a strange dream. A voice
told me that I could wish for something, that I should only say what I wanted to know, and all my
questions would be answered. What do you think I asked? That I would like to know when the war
would be over for me. You know what I mean, Doctor - for me! I wanted to know, when we, when our
camp, would be liberated and our sufferings come to an end.'
'And when did you have this dream?' I asked.
'In February, 1945,' he answered. It was then the beginning of March.
'What did your dream voice answer?'

Furtively he whispered to me, 'March thirtieth.'
When F--- told me about this dream, he was still full of hope and convinced that the voice of his
dream would be right. But as the promised day drew nearer, the war news which reached our camp
made it appear very unlikely that we would be free on the promised date. On March twenty-ninth, F---
suddenly became ill and ran a high temperature. On March thirtieth, the day his prophecy had told him
that the war would be over for him, he became delirious and lost consciousness. On March thirty-first,
he was dead. To all appearances, he had died of typhus."508
Other camp victims, by contrast - but equally comprehensibly - chose to identify with the camp
authorities, when allowed such honor, and therefore arrayed themselves against those who shared their fate
- against those who were also starved and deprived, frightened and worked to exhaustion. The persecution
and enslavement of others presents no difficulty - is, in fact, inevitable - in the wake of bondage and
persecution of the self. Frankl states:
"... the process of selecting Capos [trustees] was a negative one; only the most brutal of the prisoners
were chosen for this job (although there were some happy exceptions). But apart from the selection of
Capos which was undertaken by the SS, there was a sort of self-selecting process going on the whole
time among all of the prisoners.
On the average, only those prisoners could keep alive who, after years of trekking from camp to
camp, had lost all scruples in their fight for existence; they were prepared to use every means, honest
and otherwise, even brutal force, theft, and betrayal of their friends, in order to save themselves."509
"... many of the Capos fared better in the camp than they had in their entire lives. Often they were harder
on the prisoners than were the guards, and beat them more cruelly than the SS men did."510
Likewise, Solzhenitsyn:
"You - had fallen. You - were punished. You - had been uprooted from life - but you want to avoid the
very bottom of the pile? You want to hover over someone else, rifle in hand? Over your brother? Here!
Take it! And if he runs - shoot him! We will even call you comrade. And we will give you a Red Army
man's ration.
And... he grows proud. And... he tightens his grip on his gun stock. And... he shoots. And... he is
even more severe than the free guards. (How is one to understand this: Was it really a purblind faith in
social initiative? Or was it just an icy, contemptuous calculation based on the lowest human
feelings?)"511
Most camp inmates were normal, well-adapted members of society, prior to their imprisonment - which
meant that they had identified with the structure and successes of that society, with its definitions of present
278 


and ideal future, with its means to its ends. Unjust incarceration meant loss of status, heightened fear of
morality; demonstrated as nothing else could the evidently pathological operations of the state, constructed
in theory precisely to protect against such deprivation and anxiety; presented anomaly sufficient in its
fundamental import to undermine faith in previous identification, to demonstrate the incomplete, or even
corrupt, nature of previous status, to foster anxiety, depression, and desire, often realized, for dissolution
and death. How could such a threat be countered?
Conscious, rationalized denial of evident injustice made social identification possible once again - but at
the cost of substantial intrapsychic damage, dissociation. The lie involved meant sacrifice of more personal
experience, more individual possibility, more divine meaning to the group. The inevitable result of such
sacrifice - the sin against the Holy Spirit - is fanatical adherence to the letter of the law:
"Farewell happy Fields
Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail horrors, hail
Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell

Receive thy new possessor - one who brings
A mind not to be changed by place or time."512

fidelity to the lie:
"Farewell remorse! All good to me is lost

Evil, be thou my Good: by thee at least

Divided empire with Heaven's King I hold,
By thee, and more than half perhaps will reign;

As Man erelong, and this new World, shall know.
Thus while he spake, each passion dimmed his face,
Thrice changed with pale ire, envy and despair,
Which marred his borrowed visage, and betrayed
Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld,
For Heavenly minds from such distempers foul

Are ever clear. Whereof he soon aware
Each perturbation smoothed with outward calm,

Artificer of fraud, and was the first

That practised falsehood under saintly show,
Deep malice to conceal, couched with revenge...."513

allegiance to cruelty and deceit:
"Oh why should wrath be mute and fury dumb?

I am no baby, I, that with base prayers
I should repent the evils I have done.
Ten thousand worse that ever yet I did
Would I perform if I might have my will.
If one good deed in all my life I did,
I do repent it from my very soul."514

and hatred of the good:
"... the more I see
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel

Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
Of contraries; all good to me becomes
Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state,
But neither here seek I, no, nor in Heaven,
To dwell, unless by mastering Heaven's Supreme,
Nor hope to be myself less miserable
279 


By what I seek, but others to make such
As I, though thereby worse to me redound:

For only in destroying I find ease
To my relentless thoughts...."515

Human beings are emotionally attached to those whom with they identify; sympathy for the victim of
injustice means inability to perpetrate such injustice. Identification with tyranny, on the other hand, means
temporary effortless surcease from painful (intra and extrapsychic) moral conflict. Such identification
merely requires denial of the injustice committed to one's own person, and the subsequent falsification of
individual experience. This falsification cuts the empathic bonds, connecting prisoner to prisoner -
connecting man to man - connecting man to himself:
"I shall despair. There is no creature loves me;
And if I die, no soul will pity me:
Nay, wherefore should they, since that I myself

Find in myself no pity to myself."516

The victim who finds personal security in identity with his persecutor has become that persecutor; has
eliminated the possibility of further adaptation, integration and growth; has voluntarily forfeited possibility
of redemption. Solzhenitsyn describes the reactions and actions of staunch Communist Party members,
imprisoned and devoured by the system they supported and produced:
"To say that things were painful for them is to say almost nothing. They were incapable of assimilating
such a blow, such a downfall, and from their own people, too, from their own dear Party, and, from all
appearances, for nothing at all. After all, they had been guilty of nothing as far as the Pary was
concerned - nothing at all. It was painful for them to such a degree that it was considered taboo among
them, uncomradely, to ask: 'What were you imprisoned for?' The only squeamish generation of
prisoners! The rest of us, in 1945, with tongues hanging out, used to recount our arrests, couldn't wait to
tell the story to every chance newcomer we met and to the whole cell - as if it were an anecdote.
Here's the sort of people they were. Olga Sliozberg's husband had already been arrested, and they
had come to carry out a search and arrest her too. The search lasted four hours - and she spent those four
hours sorting out the minutes of the congress of Stakhanovites of the bristle and brush industry, of which
she had been the secretary until the previous day. The incomplete state of the minutes troubled her more
than her children, who she was now leaving forever! Even the interrogator conducting the search could
not resist telling her: 'Come on now, say farewell to your children!'
Here's the sort of people they were. A letter from her fifteen-year old daughter came to Yelizaveta
Tsetkova in the Kazan Prison for long-term prisoners: 'Mama! Tell me, write to me - are you guilty or
not? I hope you weren't guilty, because then I won't join the Komsomol [a Soviet youth organization],
and I won't forgive them because of you. But if you are guilty - I won't write you any more and will
hate you.' And the mother was stricken by remorse in her damp gravelike cell with its dim little lamp:
How could her daughter live without the Komsomol? How could she be permitted to hate Soviet power?
Better that she should hate me. And she wrote: 'I am guilty.... Enter the Komsomol!'
How could it be anything but hard! It was more than the human heart could bear: to fall beneath the
beloved axe - then to have to justify its wisdom. But that is the price a man pays for entrusting his Godgiven
soul to human dogma. Even today any orthodox Communist will affirm that Tsetkova acted
correctly. Even today they cannot be convinced that this is precisely the "perversion of small forces,"
that the mother perverted her daughter and harmed her soul.
Here's the sort of people they were: Y.T. gave sincere testimony against her husband - anything to
aid the Party!
Oh, how one could pity them if at least now they had come to comprehend their former
wretchedness! This whole chapter could have been written quite differently if today at least they had
forsaken their earlier views!
But it happened the way Mariya Danielyan had dreamed it would: 'If I leave here someday, I am
going to live as if nothing had taken place.'
280 






Loyalty? And in our view it is just plain pigheadedness. These devotees to the theory of development
construed loyalty to that development to mean renunciation of any personal development whatsoever!
As Nikolai Adamovich Vilenchuk said, after serving seventeen years: 'We believed in the Party - and
we were not mistaken!' Is this loyalty or pigheadedness?
No, it was not for show and not out of hypocrisy that they argued in the cells in defense of all the
government's actions. They needed ideological arguments in order to hold on to a sense of their own
rightness - otherwise, insanity was not far off."517
"The evidence is intolerable - so much the worse for the evidence!" The hero, the savior, is
metaphorical or narrative description of the pattern by which the existence of anomalous information is
accepted, mined for significance, and incorporated into the body of cultural adaptation. The devil,
incarnation of evil, is embodiment, in procedure, episode and word, of the tendency that denies, rather than
accepting; embodiment of the process that consciously inhibits life and its development - the process that
brings to a halt the spirit's revolutionary process of adaptation:
"Just tell us one thing: Who laid the bricks, who laid the bricks in the wall? Was it you, you hardheads?"518

Ideology is fixed world-picture; not empirical description, although constantly confused with such; is
portrait of significance, of meaning - mythically-grounded determinant of interpretation of present actuality
and future ideal, in affect. Ideology is limited, static portrayal of an infinitely complex and constantly
transforming actuality; is restriction of the chaos that brings hope to life to the order that stultifies and
deadens; is denial of possibility, in behavior, imagination and thought.
Behavioral proclivity denied or suppressed is action potential no longer accessible for expansion of
competence; is procedural possibility denied life; is adaptive avenue permanently barricaded. Suppression
or avoidance of (heretical) imagination and thought is rejection of possibility for transformation, which
provides the precondition for successful adaptation to the tragic conditions of human existence. Rejection
of behavioral possibility, unique imagination and thought is denial of the heroic, the better part of the self,
the only part capable of voluntarily withstanding the tragedy of existence. Such denial leads inexorably to
demonic possession, metaphorically speaking - to neurotic misery, interpersonal cruelty, and desire for the
vengeful dissolution of existence.
Ideology confines human potential to a narrow and defined realm. Adaptation undertaken within that
realm necessarily remains insufficient, is destined to produce misery, as it is only relationship with the
transcendent that allows life to retain its savour. Ideology says "it must be thus," but human behavior
constantly exceeds its realm of representation; such capacity for exception must therefore be denied, lest
faith in ideology vanish, and chaos, intolerable chaos, reappear. The ideologue says: anomaly means
dissolution, dissolution means terror - that which frightens is evil: anomaly is evil. It is not the existence of
anomalous information that constitutes evil, however - such information refreshes, when properly
consumed. Evil is the process by which the significance of the anomaly is denied; the process by which the
meaning of the anomaly - by which meaning itself, truth itself - is rejected. This rejection means,
necessarily, life rendered unbearable, hellish:
"... for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain

Torments him: round he throws his baleful eyes,
That witnessed huge affliction and dismay,
Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate;

At once, as far as angel's ken, he views
The dismal situation waste and wild;
A dungeon horrible, on all sides round,
As one great furnace flamed, yet from these flames
No light, but rather darkness visible
Served only to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes
281 







That comes to all, but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed
With ever-burning sulphur unconsumed.
Such place Eternal Justice had prepared
For those rebellious, here their prison ordained
In utter darkness, and their portion set,
As far removed from God and light of Heaven
As from the center thrice to the utmost pole."519
The fact, as fact - regardless of content - is not evil; it is mere (terrible) actuality. It is the attitude to the
fact that has a moral or immoral nature. There are no evil facts - although there are facts about evil; it is
denial of the unacceptable fact that constitutes evil - at least insofar as human control extends. The
suppression of unbearable fact transforms the conservative tendency to preserve into the authoritarian
tendency to crush; transforms the liberal wish to transform into the decadent desire to subvert. Confusion of
evil with the unbearable fact, rather than with the tendency to deny the fact, is equivalent to equation of the
good with the (static) product of heroism, rather than with the (dynamic) act of heroism itself. Confusion of
evil with the fact, the act of blaming the messenger, merely provides rationale for the act of denial,
justification for savage repression, and mask of morality for decadence and authoritarianism.
Every act of repression - every lie - creates an intrapsychic reservoir, so to speak, of disregarded
experience - of truth, unsettling and disturbing. In this reservoir lives the re-animated dragon of chaos,
ready to devour, in an unguarded moment, the quaking and deceitful soul. Every act of suppression limits
potential for action and representation; weakens the total personality; constantly increases likelihood for
continued and expanded suppression of experience:
For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly: but whosoever hath not,
from him shall be taken away even that he hath. (Matthew 13: 12).
Denial of (anomalous) experience eliminates possibility of growth; culminates in establishment of a
personality whose weakness in the face of inevitable tragic circumstance - and consequent suffering -
produces desire for annihilation of life. Repression of fact - of truth - ensures deterioration of personality;
assures transformation of subjective experience into endless meaningless sterility and misery. Acceptance,
by contrast - in the spirit of ignorant humility, courage disguised - provides necessary precondition for
change.
Myth offers an imitative schema for the generation of such acceptance - for development of the ability
to constantly adapt - through encouragement of identification with the hero, whose form is constantly
represented in ethical behavior, portrayed in ritual, and described in narrative. The story of the hero is
symbolic depiction of the man who chooses the third way, when confronted by facts whose significance
undermines personal or social stability - who risks intrapsychic dissolution as voluntarily-chosen
alternative to adoption of tyranny or acceptance of decadence. Failure to adopt such identification -
rejection of the heroic - ensures constant restriction of action and imagination; generates hatred, cruelty,
disgust for the weak - assures adoption of the lie as prime, and perhaps most common, adaptive strategy.
Such adoption inevitably transforms human experience into hell on earth - into endless unbearable
intrapsychic and interpersonal misery:
"Him the Almighty Power
Hurled headlong flaming from the ethereal Sky
With hideous ruin and combustion down
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell
In adamantine chains and penal fire."520
The definition of moral and immoral accepted by the members of a given society remains dependent
upon the conceptualization of the way accepted by that society - remains dependent upon the current rankordering
and hierarchical organization of meanings, within that society. From within the confines of a
particular conceptualization, certain behaviors, productions of the imagination, and ideas are attributed
status of good and status of evil, in accordance with their perceived utility, with regards to a particular goal.
282 









Any act or idea that interferes with current individual desire becomes the fool, or worse - the enemy. This
means that if the individual - or the group - desires anything more than to live in the light, so to speak, then
truth and wisdom necessarily become foreign, abhorrent. What may be regarded as useful and necessary,
from a higher order of morality, may look positively useless and counterproductive, from a lower - and will
come to be treated in that manner. So the individual (or the attribute) that is serving such a higher function
may well appear "contaminated by the dragon of chaos" by those who have not yet seen or who will not
admit to the necessity and desirability of that function. Such devaluation of the "revolutionary best" dooms
the individual - and those he can affect - to endless misery and weakness. Restricted and narrow goals
produce warped and stunted personalities, who have cast the best within them into the domain of anomaly -
defining their true talents and "deviances" as (threatening and frustrating) impediments to their ambition.
The stunted personality will experience life as a burden - as a responsibility too heavy to bear - and turn to
resentment and hatred, as a "justifiable" alternative.
Reconceptualization of the way, by contrast, means revaluation of behavior, episode, and semantic
proposition, so that a new order might exist; means uncomfortable return to chaos, however, prior to the
reconstruction of that more inclusive order. Re-evaluation of the goal, of the ideal - undertaken,
voluntarily, as a consequence of exposure to anomalous information - may bring suppressed material,
action potential, imagination and thought, back to light; shift towards conceptualization of process of
heroism as goal - to valuation of truth, courage and love - allows for re-incorporation and subsequent
development of hitherto repressed, stunted, and pathologized possibilities:
"The great epochs of our lives come when we gain the courage to rechristen our evil as what is best in
us."521
This is not to say, stupidly, that all motivational states - or all facts, or all behavioral possibilities - are
equally "beneficial," in all situations. It is rather that our acts of self-definition (many of which have an
"arbitrary" cultural grounding) determine what we are willing to accept, at any given place and moment, as
"good" and as "evil." The self-sacrificing domestic martyr, for example, who accepts her husband's every
authoritarian demand - she has defined her capacity for violence as ethically unsuitable, and will regard it
as something forbidden and evil. This makes aggression something "contaminated by the dragon of chaos,"
from her perspective - makes it something immoral and taboo. The domestic martyr will therefore remain a
miserable doormat, unless she learns to bite - which means, until she drops her present all-too restrictive
"easy-going and affectionate" stance (which is not doing her husband any good, either, by reinforcing his
weak fascistic tendencies; nor improving the society of which her marriage is a part. Her "inability to be
angry" - which is, in reality, her inability to regard herself as "possessed of intrinsic worth" - removes
necessary limitations to her husband's inappropriate and socially-dangerous expansion of power.) It is thus
the "unsuitable desire" that is often precisely what is necessary to lift us beyond our present uncomfortable
stasis. This does not mean simple-minded application of a poorly designed strategy of "previouslyrepressed"
motivated behavior. It means, instead, true integration of what has not yet been expressed - or
even admitted - into the structure of harmonious intrapsychic and social relations:
Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy.
But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you;
That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.
For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?
And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more [than others]? do not even the publicans so?
Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. (Matthew 5:43-48)
The adoption of a particular (socially-determined) conceptualization of the tripartite structure of the way
allows for provisional establishment of the meaning of experiences - objects, situations and processes. The
nature of the goal towards which action and ideation is devoted, in the ideal, determines what behaviors and
products of imagination and abstract thought come to be regarded as acceptable, and are therefore
developed, and which are forbidden, and are therefore left repressed and stunted. If the individual or social
283 






ideal remains undeveloped, immature in conceptualization, or twisted in the course of development, then
aspects of behavior and cognition necessary for redemption - for deliverance from the unbearable weight of
tragic self-consciousness - will be suppressed, with intrapsychic and social pathology as the inevitable
result. If the individual strives primarily for material security, or social acceptance, rather than for the
mythic love of God and fellow man, then respect for truth will suffer, and complete adaptation will become
impossible.
And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him,

Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?

And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God.
Thow knowest the commmandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear

false witness, Defraud not, Honour thy father and mother.
And he answered and said unto him, Master, all these have I observed from my youth.
Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell

whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up
the cross, and follow me.
And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had great possessions.
And Jesus looked round about, and saith unto his disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches enter
into the kingdom of God!
And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answereth again, and saith unto them,
Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God!
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
God.
And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then can be saved? (Mark
10:17-26).
The highest value towards which effort is devoted determines what will become elevated, and what
subjugated, in the course of individual and social existence. If security or power is valued above all else,
then all will become subject to the philosophy of expedience. In the long term, adoption of such a policy
leads to development of rigid, weak personality (or social environment) or intrapsychic dissociation and
social chaos:
"Jesus said, "A man had received visitors. And when he had prepared the dinner, he sent his servant to
invite the guest. He went to the first one and said to him, 'My master invites you.' He said, 'I have some
claims against some merchants. They are coming to me this evening. I must go and give them my
orders. I ask to be excused from the dinner.' He went to another and said to him, 'My master has invited
you.' He said to him, 'I have just bought a house and am required for the day. I shall not have any spare
time.' He sent to another and said to him, 'My master invites you.' He said to him, 'My friend is going
to get married, and I am to prepare the banquet. I shall not be able to come. I ask to be excused from the
dinner.' He went to another and said to him, 'I have just bought a farm, and I am on my way to collect
the rent. I shall not be able to come. I ask to be excused.' The servant returned and said to his master,
'Those whom you invited to the dinner have asked to be excused.' The master said to his servants, 'Go
outside to the streets and bring back those whom you happen to meet, so that they may dine.'
Businessmen and merchants [will] not enter the places of my father."522
A man who has put his faith in what he owns, rather than what he stands for, will be unable to sacrifice
what he owns, for what he is; will necessarily choose - when the re-emergence of uncertainty forces choice
- what he has gathered around him instead of what he could be. This decision will weaken his nature, and
make him unable to cope with the tragic weight of his consciousness; will turn him towards the lie, and
make him an active agent in production of his own and his society's pathology.
If the goal towards which behavior is devoted remains pathologically restricted - if the highest ideal
remains, for example, sensual pleasure, social acceptance, power, or material security - then aspects of
behavior and ideation which exist in conflict to these goals will become pathologically twisted in
orientation, because forced to serve a contemptible master; will be defined as evil, left undeveloped in
284 




consequence, and remain unavailable for use in more potentially inclusive redemptive activity; will become
subjugated, suppressed, and stagnant. This lack of development and associated sickening will decrease
adaptive flexibility, in the face of the true challenges of life; will ensure that life's challenges appear
devastating; will assure endless hopeless suffering, pointless, miserable and frustrating. The myth of the
way, which describes human experience itself, encompasses loss of paradise, emergence of tragedy and
then, redemption - and it is the fool, the true individual, who is in desperate need of redemption. To
identify with the group is to deny the fool -
Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw I Thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or
naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?

Then shall He answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least

of these, ye did it not to Me. (Matthew 25: 44-45).

and to therefore lose all hope.
We have a model of ourselves, in imagination and semantic representation, which is in ill accord with
the actuality of ourselves, in procedure, imaginative capacity, and potential for thought. This lack of
isomorphism, this willful lack of attention to truth, means that behavior and potential thereof exists, which
is anomalous with regards to the ideal of behavior in representation - "I couldn't do that"; that episodic
capacity and content exists, which is anomalous to the ideal of such capability and content in representation
- "I couldn't imagine that"; and that semantic ability and content exists, which is anomalous with regards
to the ideal of semantic ability and content, in representation - "I couldn't think that." Pathological use of
this model (the replacement of actuality, with an insufficient idea, conceptualized in fantasy) restricts
adaptation to the unexpected, restricts adaptation to change itself. This means existence in boundless and
ever-expanding misery:
"Which way I fly is Hell; myself am Hell;
And in the lowest deep a lower deep
Still threatening to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven."523
The devil, traditional representation of evil, refuses recognition of imperfection, refuses to admit "I was
in error, in my action, in my representation"; accepts, as a consequence of unbending pride, eternal misery
- refuses metanoia, confession and reconciliation; remains forever the spirit that refuses and rejects:
"O, then at last relent; is there no place
Left for repentance, none for pardon left?
None left but by submission; and that word
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the Spirits beneath, whom I seduced
With other promises and other vaunts
Than to submit, boasting I could subdue
The Omnipotent. Ay me! they little know
How dearly I abide that boast so vain,
Under what torments inwardly I groan;
While they adore me on the throne of Hell,
With diadem and sceptre high advanced,
The lower still I fall, only supreme
In misery - such joy ambition finds!
But say I could repent, and could obtain,
By act of grace, my former state; how soon
Should height recall high thoughts, how soon unsay
What feigned submission swore; ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void -
For never can true reconcilement grow
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep:
285 

Which would but lead me to a worse relapse,
And heavier fall: so should I purchase dear
Short intermission bought with double smart.

This knows my Punisher; therefore as far
From granting he, as I from begging, peace:
All hope excluded thus."524

Such refusal - the inability to say, "I was wrong, I am sorry, I should change," means the death of hope,
existence in the hellish abyss. Rejection of fact means alienation from God, from meaning, from truth - and
life without meaning is suffering without recourse, worthy of nothing but destruction, in accordance with
self-definition. Frye states:
"The way of life is described as beginning in metanoia, a word translated "repentance" by the
[Authorized Version], which suggests a moralized inhibition of the "stop doing everything you want to
do" variety. What the word primarily means, however, is change of outlook or spiritual metamorphosis,
an enlarged vision of the dimensions of human life. Such a vision, among other things, detaches one
from one's primary community and attaches him to another. When John the Baptist says "Bring forth
fruits worthy of metanoia" (Matthew 3:8) he is addressing Jews, and goes on to say that their primary
social identity (descent from Abraham) is of no spiritual importance....
The dialectic of metanoia and sin splits the world into the kingdom of genuine identity, presented as
Jesus' "home," and a hell, a conception found in the Old Testament only in the form of death or the
grave. Hell is that, but it is also the world of anguish and torment that man goes on making for himself
all through history."525
The act of metanoia is adaptation itself: admission of error, founded on faith in ability to tolerate such
admission and its consequences; consequential dissolution, subjugation to the "hateful siege of contraries,
and - Deo concedente - restoration of intrapsychic and interpersonal integrity:
"... as soon as you have renounced that aim of "surviving at any price," and gone where the calm and
simple people go -then imprisonment begins to transform your former character in an astonishing way.
To transform it in a direction most unexpected to you.
And it would seem that in this situation feelings of malice, the disturbance of being oppressed,
aimless hate, irritability, and nervousness ought to multiply. But you yourself do not notice how, with
the impalpable flow of time, slavery nurtures in you the shoots of contradictory feelings.
Once upon a time you were sharply intolerant. You were constantly in a rush. And you were
constantly short of time. And now you have time with interest. You are surfeited with it, with its months
and years, behind you and ahead of you - and a beneficial calming fluid pours through your blood
vessels - patience.
You are ascending....
Formerly you never forgave anyone. You judged people without mercy. And you praised people with
equal lack of moderation. And now an understanding mildness has become the basis of your
uncategorical judgments. You have come to realize your own weakness - and you can therefore
understand the weakness of others. And be astonished at another's strength. And wish to possess it
yourself.
The stones rustle beneath our feet. We are ascending....
With the years, armor-plated restraint covers your heart and all your skin. You do not hasten to
question and you do not hasten to answer. Your tongue has lost its flexible capacity for easy oscillation.
Your eyes do not flash with gladness over good tidings, nor do they darken with grief.
For you still have to verify whether that's how it is going to be. And you also have to work out -
what is gladness, and what is grief.
And now the rule of your life is this: do not rejoice when you have found, do not weep when you
have lost.
Your soul, which formerly was dry, now ripens from suffering. And even if you haven't come to love
your neighbours in the Christian sense, you are at least learning to love those close to you.
286 




Those close to you in spirit who surround you in slavery. And how many of us come to realize: It is
particularly in slavery that for the first time we have learned to recognize genuine friendship!
And also those close to you in blood, who surrounded you in your former life, who loved you - while
you played the tyrant over them...
Here is a rewarding and inexhaustible direction for your thoughts: Reconsider all your previous life.
Remember everything you did that was bad and shameful and take thought - can't you possibly correct
it now?
Yes, you have been imprisoned for nothing. You have nothing to repent of before the state and its
laws.
But... before your own conscience? But... in relation to other individuals?"526
Refusal of metanoia means inevitable intermixture of Earth with Hell; conscientious acceptance, by
contrast, produces a characteristic transformation of personality, of action, imagination and thought. Frankl
states:
"We who lived in concentration camps can remember the men who walked through the huts comforting
others, giving away their last piece of bread. They may have been few in number, they they offer
sufficient proof that everything can be taken from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms -
to choose one's attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one's own way.
And there were always choices to make. Every day, every hour, offered the opportunity to make a
decision, a decision which determined whether you would or would not submit to those powers which
threatened to rob you of your very self, your inner freedom; which determined whether or not you would
become the plaything of circumstance, renouncing freedom and dignity to become moulded into the
form of the typical inmate."527
Solzhenitsyn echoes these sentiments, almost precisely:
"And how can one explain that certain unstable people found faith right there in the camp, that they
were strengthened by it, and that they survived uncorrupted?
And many more, scattered about and unnoticed, came to their alloted turning point and made no
mistake in their choice. Those who managed to see that things were not only bad for them, but even
worse, even harder, for their neighbours.
And all those who, under the threat of a penalty zone and a new term of imprisonment, refused to
become stoolies?
How, in general, can one explain Grigory Ivanovich Grigoryev, a soil scientist? A scientist who
volunteered for the People's Volunteer Corps in 1941 - and the rest of the story is a familiar one. Taken
prisoner near Vyazma, he spent his whole captivity in a German camp. And the subsequent story is also
familiar. When he returned, he was arrested by us and given a tenner. I came to know him in winter,
engaged in general work in Ekibastuz. His forthrightness gleamed from his big quiet eyes, some sort of
unwavering forthrightness. This man was never able to bow in spirit. And he didn't bow in camp, either,
even though he worked only two of his ten years in his own field of specialization, and didn't receive
food parcels from home for nearly the whole term. He was subjected on all sides to the camp
philosophy, to the camp corruption of soul, but he was incapable of adopting it. In the Kemerovo camps
(Antibess) the security chief kept trying to recruit him as a stoolie. Grigoryev replied to him quite
honestly and candidly: 'I find it quite repulsive to talk to you. You will find many willing without me.'
'You bastard, you'll crawl on all fours.' 'I would be better hanging myself from the first branch.' And so
he was sent off to a penalty situation. He stood it for about half a year. And he made mistakes which
were even more unforgivable: When he was sent on an agricultural work party, he refused (as a soil
scientist) to accept the post of brigadier offered him. He hoed and scythed with enthusiasm. And even
more stupidly: in Ekibastuz at the stone quarry he refused to be a work checker - only because he would
have had to pad the work sheets for the sloggers, for which, later on, when they caught up with it, the
eternally drunk free foreman would have to pay the penalty (but would he?) And so he went to break
rocks! His honesty was so monstrously unnatural that when he went out to process potatoes with the
vegetable storeroom brigade, he did not steal any, though everyone else did. When he was in a good
287 


post, in the privileged repair-shop brigade at the pumping-station equipment, he left simply because he
refused to wash the socks of the free bachelor construction supervisor, Treivish. (His fellow brigade
members tried to persuade him: Come on now, isn't it all the same, the kind of work you do? But no, it
turned out it was not at all the same to him!) How many times did he select the worst and hardest lot,
just so as not to have to offend against his conscience - and he didn't, not in the least, and I am a
witness. And even more: because of the astounding influence on his body of his bright and spotless
human spirit (though no one today believes in any such influence, no one understands it) the organism
of Grigory Ivanovich, who was no longer young (close to fifty), grew stronger in camp; his earlier
rheumatism of the joints disappeared completely, and he became particularly healthy after the typhus
from which he recovered: in winter, he went out in cotton sacks, making holes in them for his head and
his arms - and he did not catch cold!"528
The process of voluntary engagement in the "revaluation of good and evil," consequent to recognition of
personal insufficiency and suffering, is equivalent to adoption of identification with Horus (who, as the
process that renews, exists as something superordinate to "the morality of the past"). This means that the
capacity to re-assess morality means identification with the figure that "generates and renews the world" -
with the figure that mediates between order and chaos. It is "within the domain of that figure" that room for
all aspects of the personality actually exist - as the demands placed on the individual who wishes to
identify with the savior are so high, so to speak, that every aspect of personality must become manifested,
"redeemed," and integrated into a functioning hierarchy. The revaluation of good and evil therefore allows
for the creative re-integration of those apsects of personality - and their secondary representations in
imagination and idea - previously suppressed and stunted by immature moral ideation, including that
represented by group affiliation (posited as the highest level of ethical attainment).
The act of turning away from something anomalous is the process of labeling that anomalous thing as
"too terrifying to be encountered or considered," in its most fundamental form. To avoid something is also
to define it - and, in a more general sense, to define oneself. To avoid is to say "that is too terrible," and
that means - "too terrible for me." The impossibility of a task is necessarily determined in relationship to
the abilities of the one faced with it. The act of turning away therefore means willful opposition to the
process of adaptation, since nothing new can happen when everything new is avoided or suppressed. The
act of facing an anomaly, by contrast, is the process of labeling that event as tolerable - and,
simultaneously, the definition of oneself as the agent able to tolerate. Adoption of such a stance means the
possibility of further growth, since it is in contact with anomaly that new information is generated. This
"faith in oneself and the benevolence of the world" manifests itself as the courage to risk everything in the
pursuit of meaning. If the nature of the goal is shifted from desire for predictability to development of
personality capable of facing chaos voluntarily, then the unknown - which can never be permanently
banished - will no longer be associated with fear, and safety, paradoxically, will be permanently
extablished:
 "It was granted me to carry away from my prison years on my bent back, which nearly broke beneath
its load, this essential experience: how a human being becomes evil and how good. In the intoxication of
youthful successes I had felt myself to be infallible, and I was therefore cruel. In the surfeit of power I
was a murderer, and an oppressor. In my most evil moments, I was convinced that I was doing good,
and I was well supplied with systematic arguments. And it was only when I lay there on rotting prison
straw that I sensed within myself the first stirrings of good. Gradually it was disclosed to me that the line
separating good and evil passes not through states, nor between classes, nor between political parties
either - but right through every human heart - and through all human hearts. This line shifts. Inside us,
it oscillates with the years. And even within hearts overwhelmed by evil, one small bridgehead of good
is retained. And even in the best of all hearts, there remains... an uprooted small corner of evil.
Since then I have come to understand the truth of all the religions of the world: They struggle with
the evil inside a human being (inside every human being). It is impossible to expel evil from the world
in its entirety, but it is possible to constrict it within each person.
And since that time I have come to understand the falsehood of all the revolutions in history: They
destroy only those carriers of evil contemporary with them (and also fail, out of haste, to discriminate
288 


the carriers of good as well). And they then take to themselves as their heritage the actual evil itself,
magnified still more.
The Nuremburg Trials have to be regarded as one of the special achievements of the twentieth
century: they killed the very idea of evil, though they killed very few of the people who had been
infected by it. (Of course, Stalin deserves no credit here. He would have preferred to explain less and
shoot more.) And if by the twenty-first century humanity has not yet blown itself up and has not
suffocated itself - perhaps it is this direction that will triumph?
Yes, and if it does not triumph - then all humanity's history will have turned out to be an empty
exercise in marking time, without the tiniest mite of meaning! Whither and to what end will we
otherwise be moving? To beat the enemy over the head with a club - even cavemen knew that.
'Know thyself!' There is nothing that so aids and assists the awakening of omniscience within us as
insistent thoughts about one's own trangressions, errors, mistakes. After the difficult cycles of such
ponderings over many years, whenever I mentioned the heartlessness of our highest-ranking
bureaucrats, the cruelty of our executioners, I remember myself in my captain's shoulder boards and the
forward march of my battery through East Prussia, enshrouded in fire, and I say: 'So, were we any
better?'"529
5.3. Heroic Adaptation: Voluntary Reconstruction of the Map of Meaning
The group provides the protective structure - conditional meaning and behavioral pattern - that enables
the individual to cast off the dependence of childhood, to make the transition from the maternal to the
social, paternal world. The group is not the individual, however. Psychological development that ceases
with group identification - held up as the highest attainable good by every ideologue - severely constricts
individual and social potential, and dooms the group, inevitably, to sudden and catastrophic dissolution.
Failure to transcend group identification is, in the final analysis, as pathological as failure to leave
childhood.
Movement from the group to the individual - like that from childhood to group - follows the archetypal
transformative pattern of the heroic (paradise, breach, fall, redemption; stability, dissolution,
incorporation, reconstruction). Such transformation must be undertaken voluntarily, through conscious
exposure to the unknown - although it may be catalyzed by sufficiently unique or traumatic experience.
Failure to initiate and/or successfully complete the process of secondary maturation heightens risk for
intrapsychic and social decadence, and consequent experiential chaos, depression and anxiety (including
suicidal ideation), or enhances tendency towards fanaticism, and consequent intrapsychic and group
aggression.
The Bible, considered as a single story, presents this "process of maturation" in mythological terms.
The Old Testament offers group identity, codified by Moses, as antidote for the fallen state of man. This
antidote, while useful, is incomplete - even Moses himself, a true ancestral hero, fails to reach the
promised land. The New Testament, by contrast, offers identification with the hero as the means by which
the "fallen state" and the problems of group identity might both be "permanently" transcended. The New
Testament has been traditionally read as a description of a historical event, which redeemed mankind, once
and for all: it might more reasonably be considered the description of a process that, if enacted, could
bring about the establishment of peace on earth.
The problem is, however, that this process cannot yet really be said to be "consciously" - that is,
explicitly - understood. Furthermore, if actually undertaken, it is extremely frightening, particularly in the
initial stages. In consequence, the "imitation of Christ" - or the central culture-hero of other religious
systems - tends to take the form of ritualistic "worship," separated from other "non-religious" aspects of
life. Voluntary participation in the heroic process, by contrast - which means courageous confrontation
with the unknown - makes "worship" a matter of true identification. This means that the true "believer"
rises above dogmatic adherence to realize the soul of the hero - to "incarnate that soul" - in every aspect
of their day-to-day life.
289 

This is easy to say, but very difficult to understand - and to do. It is no easy matter to translate the
transpersonal myth of the hero into a template for action and representation, in the unique conditions that
make up an individual life. It appears equally troublesome - even hubristic - to presume that the individual
might a force worthy of "identification with the hero." Nonetheless, we are more than we seem - and are
more trouble than we imagine, when undisciplined and unrealized. The "banality of evil" - Hannah
Arendt's famous phrase,530 applied to the oft-unprepossessing Nazi "personality" - is more accurately "the
evil of banality." Our petty weaknesses accumulate, and multiply, and become the great evils of state. As
our technological power expands, the danger we pose increases - and the consequences of our voluntary
stupidity multiply. It is increasingly necessary that we set ourselves - not others - right, and that we learn
explicitly what that means.
The nature of the process of "identification with the hero" can be understood in most detail as a
consequence of the analysis of alchemy, which Jung made his life's work. Alchemy - considered most
generally as the precursor of modern chemistry - was in fact a twenty-centuries'-long endeavour to
understand the "transformations of matter." The alchemical matter, however, was not the matter of
modern science - logically enough, as the ancient alchemists practiced in the absence of the presumptions
and tools of modern science. It was a substance more like Tao - to "that which produced or constituted the
flux of being"; something more like "information" in the modern sense (if information may be considered
"latent" in unexplored places); something more like the "unknown" as such (something like the "matrix"
of being). Investigation of this instrinsically compelling "matter" - this unknown - produced a series of
internal transformations in the alchemical psyche, making it ever-more akin to the Philosopher's stone:
making it something that could turn "base matter" into spiritual gold - making it something that had, in
addition, the eternal, durable, and indestructible nature of stone. As the alchemical endeavour progressed,
through the Christian era, the "stone" became increasingly assimilated to Christ - the cornerstone
"rejected by the builders," the agent of voluntary transformation - whose actions eternally transform the
"fallen world" into paradise.
The late-stage alchemists "posited" that a personality that had completely assimilated the "spirit of the
unknown" was equivalent to Christ. Jung translated their image-laden mythological language into
something more comprehensible - but not yet understood. The terrible central message of this mode of
thought is this: do not lie, particularly to yourself, or you will undermine the process that gives you the
strength to bear the tragic world. In your weakness - the consequence of your lie - you will become cruel,
arrogant and vengeful. You will then serve as an "unconscious" emissary of the agent of destruction, and
work to bring about the end of time.
5.3.1. The Creative Illness and the Hero
"I.N.R.I." - "Igni Natura Renovatur Integra"531
The "third mode" of adaptation - alternative to decadence and fascism - is heroic. Heroism is
comparatively rare, because it requires voluntary sacrifice of group-fostered certainty, and indefinite
acceptance of consequent psychological chaos, attendant upon (re)exposure to the unknown. This is
nonetheless the creative path, leading to new discovery or reconfiguration, comprising the living element of
culture. The creative actor adopts the role of hero, and places himself beyond (even in opposition to) the
protective enclave of history. In consequence, he suffers re-exposure to the terrible unknown. Such reexposure
engenders mortal terror, but allows for union with possibility - allows for inspiration,
reconstruction, and advancement. It is the disintegration and disinhibition of meaning (preceding its
reintegration) - occurrences necessarily attendant upon the heroic process - that produces the phenomena
endlessly linking genius, in the popular imagination, with insanity. The genius and the lunatic are
separated, however, by their relative position with regards to the unknown: the genius is the fortunate hero
who faces the unexpected consequences of his insufficiently adaptive behavior voluntarily, on ground that
he has chosen. The unfortunate madman, by constrast, has run away from something carnivorous,
something that thrives on neglect and grows larger - has run away from something that will finally devour
290 



him. The genius dissolves, is flooded with indeterminate meaning, and is then reconstituted - then
dissolves, floods and reconfigures the social world. The psychotic dissolves, and drowns in the flood.
It is capacity to voluntarily face the unknown, and to reconfigure accordingly the propositions that
guided past adaptation, that constitutes the eternal spirit of man, the world-creating Word. The existence
and nature of that spirit has been granted due recognition in in Western (and Eastern) philosophy and
religion since time immemorial. The eminent theologist Reinhold Niebuhr states:
"In both Plato and Aristotle 'mind' is sharply distinguished from the body. It is the unifying and
ordering principle, the organ of logos, which brings harmony into the life of the soul, as logos is the
creative and forming principle of the world. Greek metaphysical presuppositions are naturally
determinative for the doctrine of man; and since Parmenides Greek philosophy had assumed an identity
between being and reason on the one hand and on the other presupposed that reason works upon some
formless or unformed stuff which is never completely tractable. In the thought of Aristotle matter is 'a
remnant, the non-existent in itself unknowable and alien to reason, that remains after the process of
clarifying the thing into form and conception. This non-existent neither is nor is not; it is "not yet," that
is to say it attains reality only insofar as it becomes the vehicle of some conceptual determination.' 532 " 533
The notion of the spirit's intrinsic kinship with the creator was abstractly elaborated, in much more
detail, in the eventual course of development of Judeo-Christian thought. From this viewpoint, man is
understood most profoundly in terms of his relationship to God - as made in the "image of God" - rather
than in light of his cognitive abilities, or his place in nature. The essence of this "spirit identified with God"
is the eternal capacity to create and to transform. Niebuhr observes that
"... the human spirit has the special capacity of standing continually outside itself in terms of indefinite
regression.... The self knows the world, insofar as it knows the world, because it stands outside both
itself and the world, which means that it cannot understand itself except as it is understood from beyond
itself and the world."534
This capacity for infinite transcendence, which is the ability to abstract, and then represent the
abstraction, and then abstract from the representation, and so on, without end, does not come without a
cost, as we have previously observed. We can tumble down the deck of cards, as easily as erect it;
furthermore, our capacity for evil is integrally linked with our ability to overcome boundaries.
Abstract thinking in general, and abstract moral thinking in particular, is play: the game, "what if?"
Games are played by first establishing, then identifying, then altering, basic presuppositions. Before any
game can be played, the rules have to be established; before the game can be altered, the rules have to be
made manifest. A game (at least in its final stages) is played by constructing an image of "the world" in
imagination, in accordance with certain presuppositions - which are the rules (the "environment") of the
game - and then by acting in that imaginary world. This game construction, playing and modifying is a
form of practice, for real-world activity. As games increase in complexity, in fact, it becomes increasingly
difficult to distinguish them from real-world activity.
The game itself, at its first stages, is played at the procedural level; the rules remain implicit. Once a
representation of the game has been established, then the game can be shared; later, the rules themselves
can be altered. Piaget discusses the formulation of the rules of children's games:
"From the point of view of the practice or application of rules four successive stages can be
distinguished.
A first stage of a purely motor and individual character, during which the child handles the marbles at
the dictation of his desires and motor habits. This leads to the formation of more or less ritualized
schemas, but since play is still purely individual, one can only talk of motor rules and not of truly
collective rules.
The second may be called egocentric for the following reasons. This stage begins at the moment
when the child receives from outside the example of codified rules, that is to say, some time between the
ages of two and five. But though the child imitates this example, he continues to play either by himself
291 

without bothering to find play-fellows, or with others, but without trying to win, and therefore without
attempting to unify the different ways of playing. In other words, children of this stage, even when they
are playing together, play each one 'on his own' (everyone can win at once) and without regard for any
codification of rules. This dual character, combining imitation of others with a purely individual use of
the examples received, we have designated by the term Egocentrism.
A third stage appears between 7 and 8, which we shall call the stage of incipient cooperation. Each
player now tries to win, and all, therefore, begin to concern themselves with the question of mutual
control and of unification of the rules. But while a certain agreement may be reached in the course of
one game, ideas about the rules in general are still rather vague. In other words, children of 7-8, who
belong to the same class at school and are therefore constantly playing with each other, give, when they
are questioned separately, disparate and often entirely contradictory accounts of the rules observed in
playing marbles.
Finally, between the years of 11 and 12, appears a fourth stage, which is that of the codification of
rules. Not only is every detail of procedure in the game fixed, but the actual code of rules to be observed
is known to the whole society. There is remarkable concordance in the information given by children of
10-12 belonging to the same class at school, when they are questioned on the rules of the game and their
possible variations....
If, now, we turn to the consciousness of rules we shall find a progression that is even more elusive in
detail, but no less clearly marked if taken on a big scale. We may express this by saying that the
progression runs through three stages, of which the second begins during the egocentric stage and ends
towards the middle of the stage of cooperation (9-10), and of which the third covers the remainder of
this co-operating stage and the whole of the stage marked by the codification of rules.
During the first stage rules are not yet coercive in character, either because they are purely motor, or
else (at the beginning of the egocentric stage) because they are received, as it were, unconsciously, and
as interesting examples rather than as obligatory realities.
During the second stage (apogee of egocentric and first half of cooperating stage) rules are regarded
as sacred and untouchable, emanating from adults and lasting forever. Every suggested alteration strikes
the child as a transgression.
Finally, during the third stage, a rule is looked upon as a law due to mutual consent, which you must
respect if you want to be loyal but which it is permissible to alter on the condition of enlisting general
opinion on your side.
The correlation between the three stages in the development of the consciousness of rules and the
four stages relating to their practical observance is of course only a statistical correlation and therefore
very crude. But broadly speaking the relation seems to us indisputable. The collective rule is at first
something external to the individual and consequently sacred to him; then, as he gradually makes it his
own, it comes to that extent to be felt as the free product of mutual agreement and an autonomous
conscience. And with regard to practical use, it is only natural that a mystical respect for laws should be
accompanied by a rudimentary knowledge and application of their contents, while a rational and wellfounded
respect is accompanied by an effective application of each rule in detail."535
The "second-stage" child, who accepts the presuppositions of his cultural sub-tradition as "sacred and
untouchable," thinks in the same manner as the classic, partially hypothetical, pre-experimental or
"primitive" man, who worships the past, in representation, as absolute truth. The child and the primitive are
both concerned primarily with how to behave - with how to organize behavior, contra nature, in the social
community, to simultaneously and continuously meet ends deemed desirable. It is only much later, after
these most fundamental of issues have been resolved, that the means of resolution themselves can be
questioned. This act of higher-order conceptualization means emergence of ability to play games, with the
rules of games - and belief in the justifiability of such activity (this rebuff to traditional order). This more
abstract ability allows for answer to the meta-problem of morality, posed (much) earlier: not "how to
behave?" but - "how can (or is or was) how to behave be determined?"536 Paradoxically, perhaps, the
292 











answer to this meta-problem also provides the final answer to the (apparently) less abstract question "how
to behave?" or "what is the good?"
Some examples from western religious tradition may aid in comprehending (1) the nature of the
distinction between morality's central problem ("what is the good ?") and meta-problem ("how are answers
to the question 'what is the good?' determined?"); (2) the structure of their attendant resolutions; and (3)
the manner in which the meta-problem and its solution follow in the course of historical development from
the problem and its solution - attended by (cyclical) development of increasingly sophisticated and
powerful (self)consciousness. Let us begin with the problem of (self)consciousness, which appears in part
as enhanced ability of the declarative memory system to accurately encode the nature of human behavior,
self and other. This encoding first takes the form of the narrative, or myth, which, as stated previously, is
semantic use of episodic representation of procedural wisdom. Semantic analysis of narrative - criticism537
- allows for derivation of abstracted moral principles. First-order pure semantic codification of the morality
implicit in behavior, and then in episodic/semantic (narrative or mythic) representation, appears to take the
form of the list. A list of laws - of moral rules - straightforwardly and simply defines what constitutes
acceptable behavior and what does not. An explicit list serves as an admirable guide for the adolescent,
emerging from the maternal world. Such a list might be regarded as the most basic form of explicit moral
philosophy.
The list emerges into the narrative of Judeo-Christian consciousness as a consequence of the actions of
the figure of Moses, who serves as law-giver for the Jewish people. Moses has many of the attributes of the
(typical) mythical hero - analogous to that of the supernatural ancestor of the primitive. He is characterized
by endangered birth, for example, and by dual parentage (one set humble, one exalted or divine):
And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one was Shiprah, and
the name of the other Puah:

And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them upon the stools; if

it be a son, then ye shall kill him538: but if it be a daughter, then she shall live.
But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt comanded them, but saved the men
children alive.
And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done this thing, and
saved the men children alive?

And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women: for
they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.
Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people mutiplied, and waxed very mighty.
And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses.
And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every
daughter ye shall save alive.
And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi.
And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid
him three months.
And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime
and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river's brink.

And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.

And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her maidens walked along by

the river's side; and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.

And when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on
him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children.
Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that

she may nurse the child for thee?

And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the child's mother. And
Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee wages.
And the woman took the child, and nursed it.

And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she
called his name Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of the water. (Exodus 1:15-22; 2:1-10).
293 





After Moses reaches adulthood, he rejects his secondary Egyptian heritage, and rejoins the Hebrews - in
time, becoming their leader, and leading them away from Egypt and Egyptian servitude (from slavery
under tyranny). He takes them on a heroic journey, from the unbearable and fallen present condition,
through the (purgatorial) desert - where they act in accordance with procedures he establishes - to (earthly)
paradise itself, the Promised Land of milk and honey. Frye comments:
"The Biblical pattern for the purgatorial vision is the Exodus narrative, which is in three major parts.
First is the sojourn in Egypt, the "furnace of iron," a world visited by plagues, where the Egyptian desire
to exterminate the Hebrews goes into reverse with the slaughter of the Egyptian firstborn sons. This
episode concludes with the crossing of the Red Sea, the separation of Israel from Egypt, and the
drowning of the Egyptian host. The second episode is the wandering in the wilderness, a labyrinthine
period of lost direction, where one generation has to die off before a new one can enter the Promised
Land (Psalm 95:11). This is one of several features indicating that we are in a world transcending
history, and that it is in the more poetic language of the prophets that the true or symbolic meaning of
Egypt, wilderness and Promised Land emerges more clearly.
The third stage is the entry into the Promised Land, where Moses, personifying the older generation,
dies just outside it. In Christian typology... this means that the law, which Moses symbolizes, cannot
redeem mankind: only his successor Joshua, who bears the same name as Jesus, can invade and conquer
Canaan.539"
540
Moses is a revolutionary; he teaches his people a new mode of being. This means he revalues their
goals, as well as their means. This process of revolutionary re-adaptation is necessarily preceded by a
period of intense suffering, as the affects released by the new situation fight among themselves, so to speak,
until subdued. The Biblical story portrays this process, dramatically, presenting it in terms of the lengthy
and trying desert sojourn. The provision of "heavenly" food541 during this time is a hint to the meaning, so
to speak, of the story - the interregnum of pain and confusion that precedes the re-establishment or
improvement of stability can only tolerated by those fed on "spiritual bread"; can only be tolerated by those
who have incorporated sufficient meaning, and have therefore developed wisdom, patience, and faith.
In the course of the exodus, Moses begins to serve as judge for his people - he is spontaneously chosen
by them, perhaps on the basis of perceived strength or integration of character, as mediator between
conflicting claims of value; he is forced to determine what was right, or what should be - and what was
wrong, or comparatively wrong:
And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people: and the people stood by Moses
from the morning unto the evening.
And when Moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What is this thing that thou
doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto
even?

And Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people come unto me to inquire of God:
When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between one and another, and I do make them

know the statutes of God, and his laws. (Exodus 18: 13-16).
Adoption of such a role entails (voluntary) acceptance of tremendous intrapsychic strain - strain
associated with necessity of constant, demanding moral judgment (establishment of hierarchical order,
resultant of intrapsychic Darwinian struggle of abstracted values) - and, when the ability is there,
consequent generation of compensatory adaptive activity. In the (mythic) case of Moses, such activity took
the form of translation - translation of moral principles from procedure, and narrative representation
thereof, into an abstract semantic code. This act of translation comprised a tremendous leap forward, a
qualitative shift in human cognition - regardless of whether it was actually undertaken by Moses, or by any
number of individuals, over hundreds of years (a flash in time, nonetheless, from the evolutionary
perspective), and conflated into a "single event," by the socially-mediated process of mythological
memory. The emergence of moral knowledge in explicit semantic form (as opposed to its implicit
representation in narrative) appears represented in mythology as "brought about" by revelation. This
294 


revelation is reception of knowledge "from a higher source" - in this case, from the episodic to the
semantic memory systems - from the mysterious domain of imagination to the concrete word.
Generation (disinhibition, more accurately) of overwhelming affect will necessarily characterize
transitions in cognitive ability of this magnitude; generation akin to that accompanying the "insight"
phenomena typical of creative (or psychotherapeutic) endeavor. This might be considered a consequence of
initial (temporary) establishment of intrapsychic integration - establishment of isormorphism or
concordance between the procedural, episodic and semantic memory systems - and recognition of the
manifold possibilities (the hitherto unforeseeen redemptive opportunities) thereby released. This means -
the "first discovery" of a new categorization system means immediate apprehension of the broad "potential
utility" of those things newly comprehended (means understanding of their refreshed promise). This "first
discovery" - Eureka! - is the positive aspect of the voluntary renovelization of experience. Thus - after
Moses returns to the Israelites, after meeting God on Mount Sinai for the last time, he is so affected his
appearance is rendered intolerable to his compatriots:
And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water.
And he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten commandments. And it came to pass,
when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in Moses' hand, when he
came down from the mount, that Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him.

And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shown, and they
were afraid to come nigh him.

And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rules of the congregation returned unto him: and
Moses talked with them.
And afterward all the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all that the Lord

had spoken with him in Mount Sinai. (Exodus 34:29-32).
This "shining face" is mythic (semantic/episodic) equation of the individual with solar power; symbolic of
illumination, enlightenment, momentary transfiguration into eternal representative of the gods. Moses
transforms what had previously been custom, embedded in behavior, represented in myth, into an explicit
semantic code. This "great leap forward," undertaken by Moses, places him temporarily into the company
of God. The Decalogue is the single most fundamental subset of the "new" code:
Thou shalt have no other gods before me.
Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or
that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:

Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God,
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that

hate me.
And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.
Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that
taketh his name in vain.
Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.
Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy work:

But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy

son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy castle, nor thy stranger that is within

thy gates:
For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh
day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it542 .
Honour thy father and thy mother.
Thou shalt not kill.
Thou shalt not commit adultery.
Thou shalt not steal.
Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.
295 











Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet they neighbour's wife, nor his
manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's. (Exodus
20:3-20:17).
Codification of tradition is necessarily dependent upon existence of tradition - established adaptive
behavior, and secondary representation thereof. The knowledge embodied in such tradition exists as a
consequence of evolutionary pressure, so to speak, operating primarily (in the literal sense) at the level of
interpersonal action, and is only secondarily, lately, translated up the hierarchy of consciousness to
representation. This means that evolution proceeds at least as often (and, generally, more profoundly) from
behavior to representation (episodic and semantic) - from adaptive action and mythic portrayal thereof (all 543 544 545 true art included) to abstract verbal knowledge - as from representation to behavior.
Translation of tradition into law makes verbally abstract what had previously been, at best, encoded in
image - makes the morality of the culture and the moral individual "conscious" for the first time. This act
of transformation constitutes the culminating act of centuries of abstract adaptive endeavor and increasing
consciousnesses, emerging in a qualitative shift of cognitive sophistication, in the intrapsychic activity of a
mythologized cultural hero, whose actions are identified by the story with "heavenly" attributes, to signify
the import (and intrapsychic locale and source546) of the revolutionary occurrence. Nietzsche states:
"Great men, like great epochs, are explosive material in whom tremendous energy has been
accumulated; their prerequisite has always been, historically and physiologically, that a protracted
assembling, accumulating, economizing and preserving has preceded them - that there has been no
explosion for a long time. If the tension in the mass has grown too great the merest accidental stimulus
suffices to call the 'genius,' the 'deed,' the great destiny, into the world."547
The moral presumptions of a society emerge first in procedural form, as a consequence of individual
exploratory activity, which is the process that generates novel behavioral patterns. These behavioral
patterns are then hierarchically structured as a consequence of quasi-Darwinian competition, in accordance
with the constraints noted previously (appeal to imagination, self-sustenance, etc.). The episodic memory
systems map procedure, and outcome thereof, and thereby come to contain similar paradigmatic structure -
imagistically, and then more purely semantically. Over time, the unknown, nature, thereby comes to be
represented mythically as the affectively bivalent Great Mother, simultaneously creative and destructive.
The known, culture, becomes the Great Father, tyrant and wise king, authoritarian and protective
personality, adapted to the unknown. The knower, man, becomes the hostile mythic brothers, sons of
convention, hero and antihero, Christ and Satan - eternal generator and destroyer of history and tradition.
Semantic cognition, feeding on narrative - the bridge between the episode and the pure verbal abstraction -
derives "rules" from behavior. Application of the rules alters the environment, including procedural and
episodic representations thereof. Thus the cycle continues.
Culture serves to protect the individual against the consequences of his or her vulnerability (at least in its
positive aspect); but the price paid for absolute security is freedom and individuality, and therefore,
creativity. Sacrifice of individual creativity, by choice, eventually deprives life of pleasure, of meaning -
but not of anxiety or pain - and therefore renders life unbearable. Civilized or historical homo sapiens
grows up within a structured canon of principles implicitly and explicitly posited and held as absolute by
the majority of individuals within his or her civilization. In return for this legacy, which is in fact the sum
total of the efforts of mankind over thousands of years, the individual is moulded and shaped, and can
therefore survive independently; but all this shaping is not purely beneficial. It is an unhappy fact that the
intrinsically rewarding, implicitly interesting activities associated with individual heroism often come to
pose a threat to the established structure of the group.
The Great Father, positive aspect of history, protects man from the Terrible Mother. He is civilized
order, education and wisdom embodied, and represented; is the abstracted and integrated personification of
all those heroes who have come before and left their mark on the (cultural) behavior of the species. He is
ritual model for emulation - Good King, Wise Judge, man of Courage, of Action, of Art, of Thought.
Insofar as he represents particular, specific patterns of action, however, he is the enemy of possibility, of
life in the present itself, of the hero - and is therefore, necessarily, captor of the spirit, embodiment of the
Tyrant, the Bureaucrat. This is history as the Terrible Father, dead weight of the past, crushing mass of
296 

narrow, bigoted, ill-informed opinion and popular prejudice. This is the force that oppresses the Good
Mother, the creative aspect of life itself. The Terrible Father opposes anything new, anything that threatens
his integral structure and absolute dominance. Identification of the well-adapted man with his culture
means that as history becomes established, in counterposition to the force that nature represents, the
creative hero has to battle public opinion [composed, when ideological, of contemporary slogans (sluaghghairms:
battle cries of the dead)] as well as the forces of the "natural" unknown. The hero is an enemy of
the historically-determined structure of values and assumptions, because he may have to re-order that
structure, to deal with what still remains unknown, and not merely add to or maintain it. In that process of
re-ordering, unfortunately, he risks exposing himself and all those well-adapted men who identify with and
maintain that culture to the terrible forces of the unknown - to mortal anxiety and dread, to fear of the void,
to terror of insanity, physical destruction, and annihilation.
These ideas are dramatically presented in Dostoevski's The Grand Inquisitor. Ivan, tormented atheist,
tells a story he has invented to his religiously-minded younger brother, Alyosha, a novice at the local
monastery. Christ returns to earth, to Seville, during the time of the Spanish inquisition:
"He came unobserved and moved about silently but, strangely enough, those who saw Him recognized
Him at once. This might, perhaps, be the best part of my poem if I could explain what made them
recognize Him... People are drawn to Him by an irresistible force, they gather around Him, follow Him,
and soon there is a crowd. He walks among them in silence, a gentle smile of infinite compassion on His
lips. The sun of love burns in His heart; light, understanding, and spiritual power flow from His eyes and
set people's hearts vibrating with love for Him. He holds His hands out to them, blesses them, and just
from touching Him, or even His clothes, comes a healing power. An old man who has been blind from
childhood suddenly cries out to Him: 'Cure me, oh Lord, so that I may see You too!' And it is as if
scales had fallen from his eyes, and the blind man sees Him. People weep and kiss the ground on which
He walks. Children scatter flowers in His path and cry out to Him, 'Hosannah!' 'It is He, He Himself!'
people keep saying. 'Who else could it be!' He stops on the steps of the cathedral of Seville at a moment
when a small white coffin is carried into the church by weeping bearers. In it lies a girl of seven, the
only daughter of a prominent man. She lies there amidst flowers. 'He will raise your child from the
dead!' people shout to the weeping mother. The priest, who has come out of the cathedral to meet the
procession, looks perplexed and frowns. But now the mother of the dead child throws herself at His feet,
wailing, 'If it is truly You, give me back my child!' and she stretches out her hands to Him. The procession
stops. They put the coffin down at His feet. He looks down with compassion, His lips form the
words 'Talitha cumi' - arise, maiden - and the maiden arises. The little girl sits up in her coffin, opens
her little eyes, looks around in surprise, and smiles. She holds the white roses that had been placed in her
hand when they had laid her in the coffin. There is confusion among the people, shouting and weeping.
Just at that moment, the Cardinal, the Grand Inquisitor himself, crosses the cathedral square. He is a
man of almost ninety, tall and erect. His face is drawn, his eyes are sunken, but they still glow as though
a spark smoldered in them. Oh, now he is not wearing his magnificent cardinal's robes in which he
paraded before the crowds the day before, when they were burning the enemies of the Roman Church;
no, today he is wearing just the coarse cassock of an ordinary monk. He is followed by his grisly
assistants, his slaves, his 'holy guard.' He sees the crowd gathered, stops, and watches from a distance.
He sees everything: the placing of the coffin at His feet and the girl rising from it. His face darkens. He
knits his thick white brows; his eyes flash with an ominous fire. He points his finger and orders his
guards to seize Him.
The Grand Inquisitor's power is so great and the people are so submissive and tremblingly obedient
to him that they immediately open up a passage for the guards. A death-like silence descends upon the
square and in that silence the guards lay hands on Him and lead Him away.
Then everyone in the crowd, to a man, prostrates himself before the Grand Inquisitor. The old man
blesses them in silence and passes on.
The guards take their prisoner to an old building of the Holy Inquisition and lock Him up there in a
dark, narrow, vaulted prison cell. The day declines and is replaced by the stifling, black Southern night
of Seville. The air is fragrant with laurel and lemon.
297 
Suddenly, in the complete darkness, the iron gate of the cell opens and there stands the Grand
Inquisitor himself, holding a light in his hand. The old man enters the cell alone and, when he is inside,
the door closes behind him. He stops and for a long time - one or even two mInutes - he looks at Him.
At last he sets the light down on the table and says: 'You? Is it really You?' Receiving no answer, he
continues in great haste:
'You need not answer me. Say nothing. I know only too weII what You could tell me now. Besides,
You have no right to add anything to what You said before. Why did You come here, to interfere and
make things difficult for us? For You came to interfere - You know it. But shall I tell You what will
happen tomorrow? Well, I do not know who You really are, nor do I want to know whether You are
really He or just a likeness of Him, but no later than tomorrow I shall pronounce You the wickedest of
all heretics and sentence You to be burned at the stake, and the very people who today were kissing
Your feet will tomorrow, at a sign of my hand, hasten to Your stake to rake the coals. Don't You know
it? Oh yes, I suppose You do,' he added, deeply immersed in thought, his eyes fixed for a moment on
his prisoner."548
Despite his tyrannical actions, the Inquisitor feels compelled to justify his actions before Christ:
"'Your great prophet had a vision and told us in an allegory that he had seen all those who were in the
first resurrection and that there were twelve thousand of them from each tribe. But if there were so
many, they must have been gods rather than men. They bore Your cross, they endured years and years of
hunger in a barren wilderness, living on roots and locusts - and of course, You can point proudly at
these children of freedom, at their freely given love, and at their magnificent suffering for Your sake.
Remember, though, there were only a few thousand of them, and even these were gods rather than men.
But what about the rest? Why should the rest of mankind, the weak ones, suffer because they are unable
to stand what the strong ones can? Why is it the fault of a weak soul if it he cannot live up to such
terrifying gifts? Can it really be true that You came only for the chosen few? If that is so, it is a mystery
that we cannot understand; and if it is a mystery, we have the right to preach to man that what matters is
not freedom of choice or love, but a mystery that he must worship blindly, even at the expense of his
conscience. And that is exactly what we have done. We have corrected your Work and have now
founded it on miracle, mystery and authority. And men rejoice at being led like cattle again, with the
terrible gift of freedom that brought them so much suffering removed from them. Tell me, were we right
in preaching and acting as we did? Was it not our love for men that made us resign ourselves to the idea
of their impotence and lovingly try to lighten the burden of their responsibility, even allowing their weak
nature to sin, but with our permission? Why have You come to interfere with our work?'"549
The old priest explains what historical role the institution of the church has played, and why - and to
provide rationale for the necessity of the impending recrucifixion:
"'And we, who have taken their sins upon us to give them happiness, will stand up and say to You:
'Judge us if You can and if You dare!' Know that I am not afraid of You; know that I, too, lived in the
wilderness, fed upon roots and locusts, that I, too, blessed the freedom which You bestowed upon men,
and that I, too, was prepared to take my place among the strong chosen ones, aspiring to be counted
among them. But I came to my senses and refused to serve a mad cause. I turned away and joined those
who were endeavoring to correct Your work. I left the proud and turned to the meek, for the happiness
of the meek. What I have told You will happen and our kingdom will come. I repeat, tomorrow You will
see obedient herds, at the first sign from me, hurry to heap coals on the fire beneath the stake at which I
shall have You burned, because, by coming here, You have made our task more difficult. For if anyone
has ever deserved our fire, it is You, and I shall have You burned tomorrow. Dixi!'"550
The story takes an unexpected twist just prior to its conclusion - a twist which illustrates Dostoevsky's
genius, and his capacity to leap beyond the ideologically and easily obvious. Ivan says:
"The Grand Inquisitor falls silent and waits for some time for the prisoner to answer. The prisoner's
silence has weighed on him. He has watched Him; He listened to him intently, looking gently into his
eyes, and apparently unwilling to speak. The old man longs for Him to say something, however painful
and terrifying. But instead, He suddenly goes over to the old man and kisses him gently on his old,
298 








bloodless lips. And that is his only answer. The old man is startled and shudders. The corners of his lips
seem to quiver slightly. He walks to the door, opens it, and says to Him, 'Go now, and do not come
back... ever. You must never, never, come again!' And he lets the prisoner out into the dark streets of the
city. The prisoner leaves."551
As William James said: "The community stagnates without the impulse of the individual. The impulse dies
away without the sympathy of the community."552
The myths of a culture are its central stories. These stories provide a dramatic record of the historicallypredicated
transformation of human intent, and appear to exist as the episodic/semantic embodiment of
history's cumulative effect on action. The mythical narratives that accompany retention of historicallydetermined
behavior constitute non-empirical episodic representation of that behavior and its method of
establishment. Myth is purpose, coded in episodic memory. Mythic truth is information, derived from past
experience - derived from past observation of behavior - relevant from the perspective of fundamental
motivation and affect. Myth simultaneously provides a record of historical essential, in terms of behavior,
and programs those historical essentials. Narrative provides semantic description of action in image, backtranslatable
into imaginary episodic events, capable of eliciting imitative behavior. Mythic narrative offers
dramatic presentation of morality, which is the study of what should be. Such narrative concerns itself with
the meaning of the past, with the implications of past existence for current and future activity. This
meaning constitutes the ground for the organization of behavior.
Mythic drama, which plays out the exploits of exceptional individuals, appears devoted towards
explication of a generally applicable pattern of adaptation. This archetypal model serves to aid in the
generation of all situation-specific individual behaviors. Myth evolves towards declarable description of a
procedural schema capable of underlying construction of all complex culturally-determined hierarchies of
specific behavior. This schematic pattern matches the innate, instinctual, neuropsychologically-predicated
individual potential for creative exploratory behavior - indeed, has been constructed in the course of
historical observation of that potential in action. The expression of this potential throughout history
provides for the creation of specific environmentally-appropriate social contexts, procedural and episodic,
which promote development of the innate capacities of the individual, protect from danger, offer hope, and
inhibit existential fear.
A ring of ancestral spirits, invisible and unknown, surrounds the modern individual, and protects him or
her magically from darkness and chaos. When this ring is broken - when the principles these spirits
represent become subject to critical evaluation, to the onslaught of other forms of heroism, to other
ideologies, or to the weight of individual experience - knowledge itself loses context, and the known
reverts to the unknown. This does not mean that the Terrible Mother herself sleeps under human
consciousness; it means rather that the reasons for her "existence" thousands of years ago are still
sufficient reasons today. It is not a question of racial memory, transmitted by Lamarckian means, but of the
proclivity to experience similarly under similar conditions. These conditions arise eternally when the
protective veil of culture is pierced.
History protects man against overwhelming material and spiritual onslaught. It performs this function by
providing a framework of meaning for those enmeshed within it. History, conceived of in this manner,
comprises those a priori assumptions all cultures base themselves on, which guide the action of individuals,
enraptured by "the spirit of the times." This framework of meaning is by necessity predicated upon various
articles of faith and can be described in its totality as a myth (although it also precedes myth). The "highest
levels" of myth provide man with the capacity to attribute meaning to or to discover meaning within the
tragedy of each individual human life, forever blessed and cursed by society, forever threatened and
redeemed by the unknown. To live, at this mythic level - rather than to hide - means the possibility of
reaching and perhaps exceeding the highest stage of consciousness yet attained or conceptualized, by a
particular culture. This mythic life is symbolically represented by the savior - the individual who embodies
the essential aspects of the mythological drama. In the Western tradition, for better or worse, like it or not -
that individual is Christ. Frye states:
"The significance of the life of Jesus is often thought of as a legal significance, consisting in a life of
perfect morality, or total conformity to a code of right action. But if we think of his significance as
299 




prophetic rather than legal, his real significance is that of being the one figure in history whom no
organized human society could possibly put up with. The society that rejected him represented all
societies: those responsible for his death were not the Romans or the Jews or whoever happened to be
around at the time, but the whole of mankind down to ourselves and doubtless far beyond. 'It is
expedient that one man die for the people,' said Caiphas (John 18:14), and there has never been a human
society that has not agreed with him.
What primarily distinguishes Christianity (and Judaism) from most Oriental religions, it seems to me,
is this revolutionary and prophetic element of confrontation with society. This element gives meaning
and shape to history by presenting it with a dialectical meaning. From this point of view, the root of evil
in human life cannot be adequately described as ignorance, or the cure for it correctly described as
enlightenment. The record of human cruelty and folly is too hideous for anything but the sense of a
corrupted will to come near a diagnosis. Hence Jesus was not simply the compassionate Jesus as Buddha
was the compassionate Buddha. His work, though it includes teaching the ways of enlightenment, does
not stop there, but goes through a martyrdom and a descent into death. Two implications here are of
especial importance for our present purpose. One, a specifically historical situation is latent in any
'enlightenment': man has to fight his way out of history and not simply awaken from it. Two, the ability
to absorb a complete individual is, so far, beyond the capacity of any society, including those that call
themselves Christian."553
Myth has come to encapsulate and express the essential nature of the exploratory, creative,
communicative psyche, as manifested in behavior, as a consequence of observation and re-representation of
that behavior, in the temporally summed historically-determined manner beginning with imitation and
ending with verbal abstraction. To what end are all behaviors (and representations of those behaviors)
archetypally subjugated? Towards establishment of a state - a spiritual kingdom - that allows the
behavioral processes that transform and establish morality to flourish. Historical cultures, after all - at least
those expressly open to change - organize behavior such that the self and the other are treated, in the ideal
(implicit or explicit) with respect due the mediator of order and chaos. Moral action towards other and self
therefore constitutes an "as if" statement, from the perspective of the semantic system: the moral individual
treats himself and others "as if" recognizing, respecting and paying homage to the ultimate source of
creative adaptation (the ultimate source of "the world"). Such behavior "unconsciously" assumes identity
between the individual and the savior - the archetypal redeemer, the culture-bearer, the divine hero. This is
organization of incorporated behavior in accordance with recognition of the source of incorporated
behavior. Establishment of such organization, however, poses threat to morality predicated strictly upon
adherence to tradition.
Heroic behavior compels imitation - a hero, by definition, serves as a model for emulation. The
behavior of the culture-bearer, the archetypal hero, constitutes embodiment of an elaborate procedural
(moral) code. This code is the end result of an evolutionary process, consisting of the establishment of
creative behaviors, in the course of heroic endeavor, their subsequent communication in imitation and its
abstract forms, and their integration, over time, into a consistent pattern of behavior, whose nature and
expression constitutes the cultural character. This cultural character is the central "personality" of the
healthy individual, embodied in procedure; secondarily represented in episodic and semantic memory.
Ideally, this character tends towards harmonious balance between tradition and adaptation, and the needs of
self and other. It is the constant attempt to accurately represent such character that constitutes the "goal" of
the myth of man.
As history progresses, becomes more "conscious" and differentiated - or, more accurately, as the
presuppositions underlying adaptive social behavior become more and more accurately abstractly
formulated (more declarative) - society moves from conceptualization of the consequences or productions
of heroism as the ideal towards which behavior is to be devoted towards conceptualization of the act of
heroism itself as such an ideal. This is movement from product to process. This transformation in
conceptualization is presented in dramatic form in the Western tradition in the New Testament's
description of the passion of Christ, which dramatically presents the process and consequences of
revolutionary restructuring of the axioms of Western morality.
Christ has long been considered implicitly "contained" in the Old Testament. Frye comments:
300 





"For Paul, Christ was mainly the concealed hero of the Old Testament story and the post-Easter Christ
of the resurrection. The Gospels present Christ in a form that fits this pre-Gospel conception of him: not
in a biographical form but as a discontinuous sequence of appearances in which Jesus comments on the
Old Testament as a series of past events, laws and images coming permanently alive in the Messianic
context, and body, which he supplies."554
What this means, at the most fundamental level of analysis, is that the pattern of action, imagination and
thought that Christ represents is necessarily "there" in any narrative or mythology, sufficiently compelling
to embed itself in memory. The reasons for this implicit existence are clear, in a sense: Christ embodies the
hero, grounded in tradition, who is narrative depiction of the basis for successful individual and social
adaptation itself. As the Word, "made flesh" (John 1:14) there "in the beginning" (John 1:1), he represents,
simultaneously, the power that divides order from chaos, and tradition rendered spiritual, abstract,
declarative, semantic. His manner of being is that which moves morality itself from rule of law to rule of
spirit, which means process. Spirit is process, simultaneously opposed to and responsible for generating
static being. Frye states:
"... we are told in the New Testament itself that the mysteries of faith have to be 'spiritually discerned'
(I Corinthians 2:14). This is in a passage where Paul is contrasting the letter, which he says 'killeth,'
with the spirit that 'giveth life.'"
Figure 60: The Emergence of Christ from Group Identity and Chaos
This idea is represented schematically in Figure 60: The Emergence of Christ from Group Identity and
Chaos, which also portrays the Christian "story of man."
301 





For Christ, "God is not the God of the dead, but of the living." (Matthew 22:32). He pushes morality
beyond strict reliance on codified tradition - the explicit Law of Moses - not because such tradition was
unnecessary, but because it was (and is) necessarily and eternally insufficient. Christ states:
For I say unto you, That except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes and the
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. (Matthew 5:20).
but also
Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.
(Matthew 5: 17).
This means that identification with tradition is insufficient; that tradition cannot thereby be regarded as
useless, but more in the light of a developmental precursor; and, finally - that the process that regenerates
tradition is somehow implicitly contained and promoted in tradition itself.
The role of Christ, who redeems culture from enslavement to the law, is prefigured at the end of Exodus,
in the sequence including and continuing after the death of Moses (as discussed previously). Christ, in fact,
appears as a second Moses, who offers a spiritual (intrapsychic) kingdom as the final version of the land
promised to the Israelites by God. 556 He is apparently granted the authority to make such an offer with the
explicit collaboration of Moses, even - granted such power, like Moses, on high ( as befits a "solar deity"):
And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high
mountain apart,

And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the
light.
And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.

Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make
here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.
While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud,
which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.

And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were sore afraid. (Matthew 17:1-9).
Like Moses, as well, Christ delivers his most famous address (which Frye interprets as a long
commentary on the Decalogue) - on a mountaintop. Frye notes that the Law of Moses is based upon
prohibition, description of what is forbidden: "Thou shalt not." By contrast, Christ's message is more in the
manner of exhortation, description of active good: "Thou shalt...."557 This transformation is predicated upon
development of heightened moral consciousness. In the beginning, for a soul steeped in sin, so to speak, it
is an easier matter to identify what is evidently dangerous, what should obviously be brought under control.
Once a certain clarity of spirit is attained, as a consequence of conscientious, disciplined adherence to
tradition, it becomes possible to determine what the good is, what should be done - rather than merely what
should not. This contrast also serves as analogue to the relationship between adolescent and adult morality:
strict group identity appropriately socializes the no- longer-properly-dependent child, and allows him or her
to make the leap from infancy to adulthood. The capacity to act in a disciplined manner - which means, to
follow the rules - is a necessary precondition to adult flexibility, but should not be confused with truly
adult morality, which is the capacity to produce new sets of rules, with (updated) adaptive utility. This is
also not to say, idiotically, that "Jewish" morality is adolescent, and "Christian" adult. Examples of
prophetic "antagonism to tyrannical order" abound in the Old Testament, as we have seen.558 The contrast
is rather between the dogmatic and rigid and the creative and responsible within creeds, and not between
the adherents of different creeds.
Development of the list of law - the moral wisdom of the past, cast in stone - makes the extant
procedural and episodic cultural structure explicitly "conscious" for the first time. The simplicity of the list
makes it easily memorable, and accessible as a "shared point of reference." The benefits of its abstraction -
communicability and potential for rapid generalization - makes it a potent force for the establishment and
continuation of order. The list is nonetheless characterized by the presence of profound intrinsic structural
limitations. It is of insufficient complexity to truly represent the nature of procedural morality (which is
302 













hierarchically organized, in a mutable and context-dependent fashion). It is unable to address suffering
produced by conflict of duty - to define acceptable behavior when the situation compels conflicting
behavioral response (when one listed moral prerequisite conflicts with another). The establishment of fixed
law also limits capacity for judgment and choice, restricting adaptive flexibility, often dangerously, when
"environmental alteration" makes such flexibility necessary:
Beware that no one lead you astray, saying, 'Lo here!' or 'Lo there!' For the Son of Man is within you.
Follow after him.

Those who seek him will find him.

Go then and preach the gospel of the kingdom.
Do not lay down any rules beyond what I appointed for you, and do not give a law like the lawgiver lest

you be constrained by it. 559 560

As a consequence of its intrinsic limitations, the list, which states what must not be, must give way, once
fulfilled, to establishment of a more abstract form of moral order, predicated upon more flexible principle -
which suggests what should be.
Descriptions of Christ's attempts to transcend the (dangerous yet necessary) limitations upon behavior
imposed by adherence to the letter of the law take the form of narrative about paradox. It might be said
that Christ presents (or is presented with) a series of Gordian knots - moral dilemmas - which emerge as an
inevitable consequence of the structure of the list of laws. He plays a deadly serious game with the
temporal representatives of then-traditional order, represented in the New Testament in the form of
"Pharisees and scribes," teasing them into koan-like conundrums, which emerge as a consequence of their
own beliefs:
And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he went through the corn fields; and his
disciples did eat, rubbing them in their hands.
And certain of the Pharisees said unto them, Why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath
days?561
And Jesus answering them said, Have ye not read so much as this, what David did, when himself was an
hungred, and they which were with him;
How he went into the house of God, and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to them that were
with him; which it is not lawful to eat but for the priests alone?562
And he said unto them, That the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.
And it came to pass also on another sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue and taught: and there
was a man whose right hand was withered.
And the scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on the sabbath day; that they might
find an accusation against him.
But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand, Rise up, and stand forth in
the midst. And he arose and stood forth.
Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one thing: Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good, or to do
evil? to save life, or to destroy it?
And looking round upon them all, he said unto the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did so: and his
hand was restored whole as the other.
And they were filled with madness; and communed one with another what they might do to Jesus. (Luke
6:1-11).
Similarly:
And it came to pass, as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath

day, that they watched him.

And, behold, there was a certain man before him which had the dropsy.

And Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath

day?

And they held their peace. And he took him, and healed him, and let him go;
303 









And answered them, saying, Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit, and will not

straightway pull him out on the sabbath day?

And they could not answer him these things. (Luke 14: 1-6).
Also:
And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth.
And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born
blind?

Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made
manifest in him.

I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh, when no man can work.
As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.
When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and he annointed the eyes
of the blind man with the clay.
And said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam (which is by interpretation Sent.) He went his way

therefore, and washed, and came seeing.
The neighbours therefore, and they which had seen him that he was blind, said, Is not this he that sat and
begged?

Some said, This is he: others said, He is like him: but he said, I am he.
Therefore they said unto him, How were thine eyes opened? He answered and said, A man that is called
Jesus made clay, and annointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I
went and washed, and I received sight.
Then said they unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not.
They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind.
And it was the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes.
Then again the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. He said unto them, He put clay
upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see.
Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man is not of God, because he keepeth not the Sabbath day.
Others said, How can a man that is a sinner do such miracles? And there was a division among them.
They say unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of him, that he hath opened thine eyes? He said,
He is a prophet.

But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and received his sight, until they
called the parents of him that had received his sight.
And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who ye say was born blind? how then doth he now see?

His parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind.
But by what means he now seeth, we know not; or who hath opened his eyes, we know not: he is of age;

ask him: he shall speak for himself.
These words spake his parents, because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had agreed already, that if any
man did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.
Therefore said his parents, He is of age; ask him.

Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give God the praise: we know that

this man is a sinner.
He answered and said, Whether he is a sinner or no, I know not: one thing I know, that, whereas I was
blind, now I see.
Then said they to him again, What did he to thee? how opened he thine eyes?

He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not hear: wherefore would ye hear it again? will
ye also be his disciples?

Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple; but we are Moses' disciples.
We know that God spake unto Moses: as for this fellow, we know not from whence he is. (John 9:1-29).
Also:
Then came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes, which came from Jerusalem,

304 


And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled, that is to say, with unwashen, hands,
they found fault.

For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the
elders.
And when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And many other things there abe,
which they have received to hold, as the washing of cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables.
Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the
elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands?

He answered and said unto them, Well hath Esias prophecied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This
people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. (Mark 7: 5-7).
Piaget - in what might be regarded as a veritable commentary on these stories - differentiates "morality
of constraint" from "morality of cooperation,"563 describing the former as a "system of rules"564 that
affective life makes use of to control behavior:565
"... since he takes rules literally and things of good only in terms of obedience, the child will at first
evaluate acts not in accordance with the motive that has prompted them but in terms of their exact
conformity with established rules."566
Piaget associates morality of constraint with an earlier level of cognitive development - a level that
nonetheless serves as a necessary precondition for further development. Piaget states: "For very young
children, a rule is a sacred reality because it is traditional; for the older ones it depends upon mutual
agreement."567 Joseph Rychlak comments:
"Younger children also are much harsher in assigning punishment to those who break the rules. They
seem to want to emphasize the punishment for its own sake, whereas older children use punishment
more to show the transgressor that a bond has been broken between people when a wrongdoing takes
place. Piaget's value system considers rule by cooperation a more satisfactory equilibration in human
relations than rule by authority. In order for a rule to work without authority pressures, there must be
feelings of mutual respect among the persons who subscribe to the rule. 568 This necessarily brings
affectivity into considerations of morality. Authoritarian constraint rules through feelings of anxiety and
fear, but when mutual respect exists among people, a morality of cooperation can occur."569
Morality of tradition is not predicated upon the same presumptions as morality of cooperation. Rigid
traditionalists assume that the answer to the question "what is the good?" can be - has been - answered
permanently, and concretely, with the list of laws. Such a list is always insufficient, however, for the
purposes of complete adaptation. Lao-Tzu can therefore say, with sufficient justification:
"The man who is truly wise and kind
leaves nothing to be done,
but he who only acts
according to his nation's law
leaves many things undone."570

Adherents of tradition rely on the attribution of superhuman value to ancestral figures, and, equally to their
current temporal and spiritual representatives. Those who embrace the morality of cooperation, by contrast,
value the notion of "mutual respect" - which means simultaneous appreciation of equality and mutual
value, among individuals within (and, much more radically, between) social groups.
The behavior of any given social group - and, therefore, the value attributed to phenomena that
constitute the shared territory of the group - emerges as a consequence of the necessity of maintaining
balance between opportunity for expression of individual desire and restriction of inter-individual conflict.
Such balance, vital to maintenance of group stability, is established long before the "rules" governing such
establishment can be modelled in episodic or semantic memory, from the phylo- and onto-genetic
perspectives. Even the simplest social animals erect a dominance hierarchy, and behave "as if" according to
305 



principle. It is idiotic to presuppose, however, that simpler animals can abstractly represent either their
behaviors - which is to say, form an imagistic model of them in imagination - or understand the
"principles" that govern them. Likewise, socialized children, in complex human societies, embody the
morality of their culture in their behavior long before they are able to abstractly represent or semantically
describe rationale for that morality, and before they can consciously (episodically or semantically)
remember learning how to behave. The same can be said for adults: the existence of morality, that intrinsic
aspect of social behavior, long precedes representation of morality, and rational description of grounds for
its existence. Morality, at its most fundamental level, is an emergent property of social interaction,
embodied in individual behavior, implicit in the value attributed to objects and situations, grounded
(unconsciously) in procedural knowledge.
Two questions arise naturally from such a discussion: "is it possible to abstract out from observation of
social interaction the 'rules' or patterns that characterize such interactions?" and, if so - "what might those
'rules' be?" Primeval group culture determines the nature of social interaction among the members of the
group, and brings general expectation, predictability, to encounters between differentially desirable,
powerful and dangerous individuals in that group. The mere fact of a stable hierarchy implies the existence
of a complex procedural morality (and an implicit system of values). The behavior of social animals, within
a hierarchy, constitutes de facto recognition of complex moral "principles," which might be regarded as the
inevitable emergent properties of constant social interaction. It is very dangerous for the entire group if any
of its members engage, routinely, in strenuous physical competition. Exhaustion - or outright elimination -
of the power of the constituent members of the group means increased risk of attack from outside, and
decreased biological reproductive and abstract creative potential, for the (kin) group as a whole. Physical
competition among social animals, necessary for dominance establishment, generally has a ritualistic
nature, and ends well before serious injury or death. Social animals have developed signals of submission,
for example, which indicate their willingness to end the struggle for power. These signals are generally
respected by the victor. The most powerful member of a given social group may come to dominate that
group - at least in some circumstances - but the domination takes limited form. Even the most dominant of
animals must act "as if" - as if their expression of power is constrained by recognition of the necessity for
maintenance of the group and the individuals who constitute and sustain it - even if those individuals are
all weaker. This constraint, partially manifested in social affection, provides the precondition for the
emergence of complex abstract morality, which originates in innate and socialized procedural knowledge,
which is "unconscious" in essence - that is, nonrepresentational, or undeclarable. It is not too difficult to
recognize in this constraint the moral imperative "treat the weak as if they they too are valuable" - as the
Old Testament prophets insisted - or even - "love thy neighbour - even thy enemy - as thyself." Consider
Christ's first sermon:
And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as his custom was, he went into the
synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read.
And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esasias. And when he had opened the book,
he found the place where it was written,
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath annointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he
hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to
the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised,

To preach the acceptable year of the Lord.
And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of all them that

were in the synagogue were fastened on him.

And he said unto them, This day is the scripture fulfilled in your ears.
And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth, And
they said, Is not this Joseph's son?

And he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we
have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country.
And he said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country.
But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up
three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land;

306 





But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a
widow.
And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and none of them was cleansed,
saving Namaan the Syrian.
And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath,
And rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was
built, that they might cast him down headlong.
But he passing through the midst of them went his way,
And came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath days.
And they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with power. (Luke 4: 14-32).
also
Then Jesus went hence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon.
And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy

on me, O Lord, thou Son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.

But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away; for
she crieth after us.
But he answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me.
But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it to dogs.
And she said, Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters' table.
Then Jesus answered and said unto here, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt.
And her daughter was made whole from that hour. (Matthew 15: 21:28).
The kingdom of heaven, as conceived of by Christ, was not only populated by the foreigner - an
inclusion sufficiently unacceptable - but by all who were deemed superfluous or sinful according to the
terms of prevailing morality: by the prostitute, the tax-collector, the diseased, the insane and, most
radically, by the enemy. This of course did not mean the end of morality - did not mean establishment of
an anarchic "community" where everything was equal, and therefore equally valueless (where the
practising and unrepentant torturer and the authentic saint share would be worthy of equal distinction) - but
the portrayal of a state where the life of the past or the conditions of birth, no matter how wretched, did not
finally determine the value of the present, or the possibilities of the future.
The extremely radical nature of this viewpoint profoundly disturbed the traditionalists in Christ's
community. His example served as reproach to their actions; his philosophy, as threat to the integrity of
their most dearly held positions. In consequence, they constantly attempted to trap him into making an
irrevocably criminal or heretic statement. This strategy tended to backfire badly:
Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle him in his talk.
And they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that thou are
true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the
person of men.
Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?

But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt me, ye hypocrites?

Shew me the tribute money. And they brought unto him a penny.
And he saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscription?

They say unto him, Caesar's. Then saith he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which
are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's.
When they heard these words, they marvelled, and left him, and went their way. (Matthew 22:15-22).
also
And as he spake, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him: and he went in, and sat down to

meat.
And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first washed before dinner.
307 








And the Lord said unto him, Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the platter; but

your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness.
Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without make that which is within also?

But rather give alms of such things as ye have: and, behold, all things are clean unto you.
But woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment
and the love of God: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
Woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the
markets.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are as graves which appear not, and the men that

walk over them are not aware of them.
Then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him, Master, thus saying thou reproachest us also.
And he said, Woe unto you also, ye lawyers! for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be borne, and ye

yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.
Woe unto you! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers: for they indeed killed them, and ye build

their sepulchres.
Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and apostles, and some of them they
shall slay and persecute:
That the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of
this generation;

From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the alter and the temple:

verily, I say unto you, it shall be required of this generation.
Woe unto you lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, and
them that were entering in ye hindered.
And as he said these things unto them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, and
to provoke him to speak of many things:

Laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of his mouth, that they might accuse him.

(Luke 11:33-54)
Christ's ability to weave his way through verbal traps inflamed the Pharisees, who attempted, with ever
more sophistry, to corner him once and for all:
Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him, and saying,
Master, which is the great commandment in the law?

Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with

all thy mind.

This is the first and great commandment.
And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. (Matthew 22:35-40).
The power of this entirely unexpected answer - in conjunction with Christ's evident mastery of traditional
knowledge (Matthew 22: 42-45) - temporarily silenced his critics:
And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any
more questions. (Matthew 22:46).
Christ's reply signified transition of morality from reliance on tradition to reliance on individual
conscience - from rule of law to rule of spirit - from prohibition to exhortation. To love God - this means
to listen to the voice of truth,571 and to act in accordance with its messages; to love thy neighbour, as thy
self. This means, not merely to be pleasant, polite and friendly, but to attribute to the other a value
equivalent to the value of the self - which, despite outward appearances, is a representative of God - and to
act in consequence of this valuation. This transition means establishment of an active dynamic balance of
competing subjectively-based motivational demands, while maintaining and creatively modifying the social
and natural environment; means fulfillment of personal and interpersonal needs in accordance with meta308




moral principles, rather than in accordance with the demands of power or dogmatic tradition. Thus, the
process by which tradition is generated in brought into inevitable contrast with tradition itself:
Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division:
For from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three.
The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father: the mother against the
daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the
daughter in law against her mother in law. (Luke 12: 51-53).
This is most truly death of unthinking adherence to authority, as in the archaic society, the past rules:
"In normal times, when culture is stable and the paternal canon remains in force for generations, the
father-son relationship consists in handing down these values to the son and impressing them upon him,
after he has passed the tests of initiation in puberty. Such times, and the psychology that goes with them,
are distinguished by the fact that there is no father-son problem, or only the barest suggestion of one.
We must not be deceived by the different experience of our own "extraordinary" age. The monotonous
sameness of fathers and sons is the rule in a stable culture. This sameness only means that the paternal
canon of rites and institutions which make the youth an adult and the father an elder holds indisputed
sway, so that the young man undergoes his prescribed transition to adulthood just as naturally as the
father undergoes his to old age.
There is, however, one exception to this, and the exception is the creative individual - the hero. As
Barlach says, the hero has to "awaken the sleeping images of the future which can come forth from the
night, in order to give the world a new and better face." This necessarily makes him a breaker of the old
law. He is the enemy of the old ruling system, of the old cultural values, and the existing court of
conscience, and so he necessarily comes into conflict with the fathers. In this conflict the "inner voice,"
the command of the transpersonal father or father archetype who wants the world to change, collides
with the personal father who speaks for the old law. We know this conflict best from the Bible story of
Jehovah's command to Abraham: "Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy
father's house, unto a land that I will show thee (Genesis 12:1), which the midrash (Bin Gorion, Sagen
der Juden, Vol. II, "Die Erzvater," XI) interprets as meaning that Abraham is to destory the gods of his
father. The message of Jesus is only an extension of the same conflict, and it repeats itself in every
revolution. Whether the new picture of God and the world conflicts with an old picture, or with the
personal father, is unimportant, for the father always represents the old order and hence also the old
picture current in his cultural canon."572
What principle is rule of spirit, rather than law, predicated upon? Respect for the innately heroic nature
of man. The "unconscious" archaic man mimics particular adaptive behaviors - integrated, however, into a
procedural structure containing all other adaptive behaviors, capable of compelling imitation, and
accompanied by episodic/semantic representation, in myth. Pre-experimental cultures regard the act of
initial establishment of adaptive behavior as divine first because it follows an archetypal and therefore
transpersonal pattern - that governing creative exploration - and second because it compels imitation, and
therefore appears possessed of power. All behaviors that change history, and compel imitation, follow the
same pattern - that of the divine hero, the embodiment of creative human potential. For the primitive
individual, it is the consequences of such heroism and the particular acts themselves that constitutes the
essence of the past. The process of imitation and abstracted variants thereof, however, allow for the nature
of this essence to be continually clarified - until, finally, representation of abstracted but specific heroic
actions give way to representation of the process of heroism, per se. At this point, it becomes possible for
the creative individual to mimic, consciously incarnate, the process of world-redemption itself.
Law is a necessary precondition to salvation, so to speak; necessary, but insufficient. Law provides the
borders that limit chaos, and allows for the protected maturation of the individual. Law disciplines
possibility, and allows the disciplined individual to bring his or her potentialities - those intrapsychic spirits
- under voluntary control; allows for the application of such potentiality to the task of creative and
courageous existence; allows spiritual water controlled flow into the valley of the shadow of death. Law
held as absolute, by contrast, puts man in the position of the eternal adolescent, dependent upon the father
309 








for every vital decision; removes the responsibility for action from the individual, and therefore prevents
him or her from discovering the potential grandeur of the soul. Life without law remains chaotic,
affectively intolerable. Life that is pure law becomes sterile, equally unbearable. The domination of chaos
or sterility equally breeds murderous resentment and hatred.
Christ presented the kingdom of heaven (the archetypal goal) as a spiritual kingdom, which is to say, a
psychological, then interpersonal, state. This state differed from the hypothetical promised land described
in the Old Testament in a number of vitally important manners. First, its construction was a matter of
voluntarily chosen alteration in personal attitude and outlook, rather than a culmination of material labour
and natural resource. Second, it was predicated upon revolutionary and paradoxical reconceptualization of
the nature of the goal - of paradise itself. Christ's life and words - as archetypal exemplars of the heroic
manner of being - place explicit stress on the process of life, rather than upon its products. The point of a
symphony is not its final note, although it proceeds inexorably to that end. Likewise, the purpose of human
existence is not the establishment of some static, perfect manner of being - man would find such perfection
intolerable, as Dostoevsky was at pains to illustrate. Rather, human purpose is generation of the ability to
concentrate on the innately interesting and affectively significant events of the present, with sufficient
consciousness and clarity, to render concern about the past and future unnecessary. "Consider the lilies of
the valley" says Christ,
how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin:
And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven,
shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?
Therefore take not thought, saying What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall
we be clothed?
for your Heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.
But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto
you.
Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself.
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. (Matthew 6: 28:34).
"Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof" does not mean "live the life of the grasshopper instead of the
ant, sing in the summer and starve in the winter," but - concentrate on the task at hand, and respond to
error, when committed. Pay attention, and when your behavior produces a consequence you find
intolerable, modify it - no matter what it takes to produce such a modification. Allow consciousness of
your present insufficiency to maintain a constant presence, so that you do not commit the error of pride,
and become unbending, rigid, and dead in spirit. Live in full recognition of your capacity for error - and
your capacity to rectify such error. Advance in confidence and faith; do not shrink back, avoiding
inevitable contact with the terrible unknown, to live in a hole that grows smaller and darker.
The significance of the Christian passion is the transformation of the process by which the goal is to be
attained, into the goal itself: the making of the "imitation of Christ" - the duty of every Christian citizen, so
to speak - into the embodiment of courageous, truthful individually unique existence:
Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me.
For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it.
For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man
give in exchange for his soul? (Matthew 16:24-26).
Christ said, put truth and regard for the divine in humanity above all else, and everything you need will
follow - not everything you think you need, as such thought is fallible, and cannot serve as an accurate
guide; but everything actually necessary, to render acutely (self)conscious life bearable, without protection
of delusion and necessary recourse to deceit, avoidance or suppression, and violence. This idea is presented
in imagistic form in Figure 61: World-Tree of Death and Redemption,
573 which portrays the "host" as the
second fruit of the world-tree. Ingestion of the first fruit produced the fall; ingestion of the second redeems
310 
those who have fallen. The negative feminine, in the form of Eve, hands out the apple, in the form of a
skull; the positive feminine, in the form of the Church, distributes the wheaten wafers that characterize the
redeemer. The incorporation of "Christ's mystic body," during the ritual of the mass, is dramatic
representation of the idea that the hero must be incorporated into each individual - that everyone must
partake of the essence of the savior.
Figure 61: World-Tree of Death and Redemption
Existence characterized by such essence takes place, from the Oriental viewpoint, on the path of
meaning, in Tao, balanced on the razor's edge between mythic masculine and mythic feminine - balanced
between the potentially stultifying safety of order, and the inherently destructive possibility of chaos. Such
311 

existence allows for introduction of sufficiently bearable meaning into blessed security; makes every
individual a stalwart guardian of tradition and an intrepid explorer of the unknown; insures simultaneous
advancement and maintenance of stable, dynamic social existence; and places the individual firmly on the
path to intrapsychic integrity and spiritual peace:
Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him to a wise man,

which built his house upon a rock;
And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell

not: for it was founded upon a rock. (Matthew 7:24-25).
5.3.2. The Alchemical Procedure and the Philosopher's Stone
5.3.2.1. Introductory Note
5.3.2.1.1. Part One
"The western alchemists followed the scenario, known already in the Hellenistic period, of the four
phases of the process of transmutation: that is, of the procurement of the Philosopher's Stone. The first
phase (the nigredo) - the regression to the fluid state of matter - corresponds to the death of the
alchemist. According to Paracelsus, 'he who woud enter the Kingdom of God must first enter with his
body into his mother and there die.' The 'mother' is the prima materia, the massa confusa, the
abyssus.574 Certain texts emphasize the synchronism between the opus alchymicum and the intimate
experience of the adept. 'Things are rendered perfect by their similars and that is why the operator must
take part in the operation.'575 'Transform yourself from dead stones into living philosopher's stones,'
writes Dorn. According to Gichtel, 'we not only receive a new soul with this regeneration but also a new
Body. The Body is extracted from the divine word or from the heavenly Sophia.' That it is not solely a
question of laboratory operations is proven by the insistence on the virtues and qualities of the
alchemist: the latter must be healthy, humble, patient, chaste; he must be of free spirit and in harmony
with his work; he must both work and meditate.
For our purposes, it will be unnecessary to summarize the other phases of the opus. Let us note,
however, the paradoxical character of the materia prima and of the Philosopher's Stone. According to
the alchemists, they both are to be found everywhere, and under all forms; and they are designated by
hundreds of terms. To cite only a text of 1526, the Stone 'is familiar to all men, both young and old; it is
found in the country, in the village, and in the town, in all things created by God; yet it is despised by
all. Rich and poor handle it every day. It is thrown into the street by servant maids. Children play with it.
Yet no one prizes it, though, next to the human soul, it is the most beautiful and most precious thing
upon earth [and has power to pull down kings and princes. Nevertheless, it is esteemed the vilest and
meanest of earthly things....]576' It is truly a question of a 'secret language' that is at once both the
expression of experiences otherwise intransmissible by the medium of ordinary language, and the
cryptic communication of the hidden meaning of symbols.
The Stone makes possible the identification of opposites.577 It purifies and 'perfects' the metals. It is
the Arabic alchemists who imparted therapeutic virtues to the Stone, and it is through the intermediary
of Arabic alchemy that the concept of the Elixir vitae arrived in the West.578 Roger Bacon speaks of a
'medicine which makes the impurities and all the corruptions of the most base metal disappear,' and
which can prolong human life for several centuries. According to Arnold of Villanova, the Stone cures
all ills and makes the old young.
As regards the process for the transmutation of metals into gold, attested already in Chinese alchemy,
it accelerates the temporal rhythm and thus contributes to the work of nature. As is written in the Summa
Perfectionis, an alchemical work of the sixteenth century, 'what Nature cannot perfect in a vast space of
time we can achieve in a short space of time by our art.' The same idea is expounded by Ben Jonson in
his play The Alchemist (Act 2, Scene 2). The alchemist affirms that 'lead and other metals . . . would be
312 






gold if they had time'; and another character adds: 'And that our art doth further.'579 In other words, the
alchemist substitutes himself for Time.580
The principles of traditional alchemy - that is, the growth of minerals, the transmutation of metals,
the Elixir, and the obligation to secrecy - were not contested in the period of the Renaissance and the
Reformation.581 However, the horizon of medieval alchemy was modified under the impact of
Neoplatonism and Hermeticism. The certitude that alchemy can second the work of Nature received a
christological significance. The alchemists now affirmed that just as Christ had redeemed humanity by
his death and resurrection, so the opus alchymicum could assure the redemption of Nature. Heinrich
Khunrath, a celebrated Hermeticist of the sixteenth century, identified the Philosopher's Stone with
Jesus Christ, the 'Son of the Macrocosm'; he thought besides that the discovery of the Stone would
unveil the true nature of the macrocosm, in the same way that Christ had brought spiritual plenitude to
man - that is, to the microcosm. The conviction that the opus alchymicum could save both man and
Nature prolonged the nostalgia for a radical renovatio, a nostalgia which had haunted western
Christianity since Joachim of Floris."582
Carl Jung devoted a tremendous amount of attention to the writings of the alchemists, in the latter part of
his life. These efforts merely added fuel to the fire of those who had branded him eccentric, because of his
interest in the psychology of religion (which is, after all, a fundamental aspect of human psychology and
culture). Even the Pulitzer-Prize winning sociologist Ernest Becker, who was favourably (and critically)
predisposed to the claims of psychoanalytic thought, stated, "I can't see that all [Jung's] tomes on alchemy
added one bit to the weight of his psychoanalytic insight."583
Many people - some with an outstanding academic reputation - have cautioned me against discussing
Jung, warned me about even mentioning his name in the academic context. Most presented this warning
with my best interests, professionally speaking, in mind. I once read a story about Paul Ricoeur, the French
philosopher and literary critic, which may be apocryphal. Someone mentioned the specific relevance of
Jung's work to Ricouer's field of inquiry. Ricoeur replied, "I haven't read Jung. He's on the Index in
France." This ironical response was, of course, made in reference to the Catholic Index of books - a listing
of readings forbidden to devout followers of that creed.
I have never met someone, however, who actually understood what Jung was talking about, and who
was simultaneously able to provide valid criticism of his ideas. Often, Jung's notions are confused with
Freud's - insofar as Freud's are understood. Freud himself certainly did not make this error. It was in fact
Freud's apprehension of Jung's profound and irreconcilable differences in thought that led to their
professional and private alienation.584 Jung's ideas are not primarily Freudian. He places little emphasis on
sexuality, or on the role of past trauma in determining present mental state. He rejected the idea of the
Oedipus complex (actually - reintrepeted that complex in a much more compelling and complete manner).
He viewed religion, not as mere neurotic defense against anxiety, but as a profoundly important means of
adaptation. It is much more accurate to view him as an intellectual descendent of Goethe and Nietzsche -
influenced in his development, to be sure, by the idea of the unconscious - than as a Freudian "disciple."585
Jung in fact spent much of his life answering - and attempting to answer - Nietzsche's questions about
morality.
Furthermore, Jung was not a "mystic." He merely delved into areas that were forbidden, because of their
religious association, to devout scientists - and was possessed of sufficient intellect and education to do so.
It is incorrect, and evidence of one-sided thinking, to label him pejoratively. It is incorrect because Jung
was, in fact, an experimental scientist of no small ability, particularly at the beginning of his career. Many
of the word-association tests he helped pioneer are still used extensively, with some technical modifications
(and little recognition of original source), in the fields of cognitive neuroscience and social psychology.
The boxing and filing away of Jung is one-sided because experimental procedure constitutes, at best, one
pole of the bipolar scientific process. A well-designed experiment allows for the testing of ideas, when it is
undertaken properly. However, ideas to test must be generated - a truism often overlooked in the course of
modern academic education. It was at this endeavor that Jung excelled. Some might object: his ideas cannot
be tested. But they have been: the card-classification experiment by Jerome Bruner, described
previously,384 provides a classic and striking example (although the results of that experiment have not
313 







generally been interpreted from the perspective of Jung's thought). Furthermore, one axis of the personality
dichotomy he proposed - that of introversion-extraversion - has stood up well, appears robust, in the face
of repeated experimental inquiry.586 In addition, the "unconscious" is clearly full of "complexes" -
although now they go by different names.587 Perhaps we will become sophisticated enough in the future, in
our ability to experiment, and in our understanding of Jung's ideas, to test more of them.
Jung was primarily a physician, which meant that he was concerned with the promotion of mental
health. He believed that such promotion was impossible - perhaps even counterproductive - in the absence
of comprehension of value, and of the processes by which value is generated. His investigation into the
nature of value led him to consideration of fantasy and myth. The world of value is a world in imagination,
comprised of the internalized result of the historically-determined social contract that provides fixed
determination of affective and motivational significance. Apprehension of this fact led Jung to analysis of
the fantasies generated by his seriously disturbed psychiatric patients, and comparison of these fantasies -
which he was unwilling to define, a priori, as meaningless - with ideas generated by religious mystics from
a variety of "primitive" and sophisticated cultures, with a vast body of literary productions in the Eastern
and Western traditions, with imagery generated in dreams (more than 25,000 dreams, by his own estimate),
and by diligent investigation into alchemical symbolism. This cross-cultural and multidisciplinary approach
to the problem of value seems at least empirical, if not experimental - and remains eminently reasonable,
in the absence of more appropriate methodology. (In fact, the prominent sociobiologist E.O. Wilson has
recently recommended adoption of such a "cross-level" analytical procedure, in the guise of "consilience"
- to unite the natural sciences, the social sciences, and the humanities.588)
Jung's ideas - particularly his "alchemical" ideas - have been inappropriately, unfairly and dangerously
ignored. They have been ignored because his students were outside the academic mainstream (and -
perhaps - because they were frequently women). They have been ignored because they present a serious
challenge - an absolutely fatal challenge, in my estimation - to Freudian psychoanalytic preconceptions.
They have been overlooked because Jung took the frightening and mysterious statements of religion
seriously; presumed that such statements, which guided human adaptation, successfully, for thousands of
years, had some significance, some meaning; have remained unexamined because psychology, the
youngest, most rational, and most deterministic of sciences, is most afraid of religion. They have been
ignored because they are exceptionally difficult to understand, from the conceptual and affective points of
view. What the ideas are is difficult to determine; what they signify, once understood, is emotionally
unacceptable. Jung essentially described the nature of the "language" of imagination, that ancient process -
of narrative, of the episodic memory system - which he thought of, fundamentally, as the collective
unconscious. Comprehension of this language is perhaps more difficult than development of fluency in an
foreign language, because such comprehension necessarily and inevitably alters modern moral
presumption. It is this latter point that constitutes the core rationale for dismissal of Jung's ideas. Jung was
no less revolutionary, from the moral perspective, than Martin Luther - may reasonably be considered a
figure in the tradition of Luther; furthermore, moral revolution is the most dreadfully uncomfortable of all
intrapsychic and social processes. It is the frightening content of Jung's thought, therefore, that leads most
fundamentally to its rejection.
Jung essentially discovered, in the course of his analysis of alchemy, the nature of the general human
pattern of adaptation, and the characteristic expression of that pattern, in fantasy, and affect. Specific
representation of this pattern, in the narrower domain of scientific endeavor, was outlined much later - to
much wider comprehension and academic acclaim - by Thomas Kuhn. Jung's student Marie-Louise von
Franz - who provided a cogent summary of Jung's complex alchemical ideas - states:
"If you read the history of the development of chemistry and particularly of physics, you will see that
even... exact natural sciences [such as chemistry and physics] could not, and still cannot, avoid basing
their thought systems on certain hypotheses. In classical physics, up to the end of the 18th century, one
of the working hypotheses, arrived at either unconsciously, or half-consciously, was that space had three
dimensions, an idea which was never questioned. The fact was always accepted, and perspective
drawings of physical events, diagrams, or experiments, were always in accordance with that theory.
Only when this theory is abandoned does one wonder how such a thing could have ever been believed.
How did one come by such an idea? Why were we so caught that nobody ever doubted or even
314 
discussed the matter? It was accepted as a self-evident fact, but what was at the root of it? Johannes
Kepler, one of the fathers of modern or classical physics, said that naturally space must have three
dimensions because of the Trinity! So our readiness to believe that space has three dimensions is a more
recent offspring of the Christian trinitarian idea.
Further, until now the European scientific mind has been possessed by the idea of causality, an idea
hitherto accepted without question: everything was causal, and the scientific attitude was that
investigations should be made with that premise in mind, for there must be a rational cause for
everything. If something appeared to be irrational, it was believed that its cause was not yet known.
Why were we so dominated by that idea? One of the chief fathers of natural sciences - and a great
protagonist of the absoluteness of the idea of causality - was the French philosopher Descartes, and he
based his belief on the immutability of God. The doctrine of this immutability of God is on of the
Christian tenets: the Divinity is unchanging, there must be no internal contradictions in God, or new
ideas or conceptions. That is the basis of the idea of causality! From the time of Descartes onwards this
seemed so self-evident to all physicists that there was no question about it. Science had merely to
investigate the causes, and we still believe this. If something falls down then one must find out why -
the wind must have blown it, or something like that, and if no reason is discovered I am sure that half of
you will say that we do not yet know the cause, but that there must be one! Our archetypal prejudices are
so strong that one cannot defend oneself against them, they just catch us.
The late physicist, Professor Wolfgang Pauli, frequently demonstrated the extent to which modern
physical sciences are in a way rooted in archetypal ideas. For instance, the idea of causality as
formulated by Descartes is responsible for enormous progress in the investigation of light, of biological
phenomena, and so on, but that thing which promotes knowledge becomes its prison. Great discoveries
in natural sciences are generally due to the appearance of a new archetypal model by which reality can
be described; that usually precedes big developments, for there is now a model which enables a much
fuller explanation than was hitherto possible.
So science has progressed, but still, any model becomes a cage, for if one comes across phenomena
difficult to explain, then instead of being adaptable and saying that the phenomena do not conform to the
model and that a new hypothesis must be found, one clings to one's hypotheses with a kind of emotional
conviction, and cannot be objective. Why shouldn't there be more than three dimensions, why not
investigate and see where we get? But that people could not do.
I remember a very good illustration given by one of Pauli's pupils. You know that the theory of ether
played a great role in the 17th and 18th centuries - namely, that there was a kind of great air-like
pneuma in the cosmos in which light existed, etc. One day when a physicist at a Congress proved that
the theory of ether was quite unnecessary, an old man with a white beard got up and in a quavering
voice said: "If ether does not exist, then everything is gone"! This old man had unconsciously projected
his idea of God into ether. Ether was his god, and if he did not have that then there was nothing left. The
man was naive enough to speak of his ideas, but all natural scientists have ultimate models of reality in
which they believer, just like the Holy Ghost.
It is a question of belief, not of science, and therefore something which cannot be discussed, and
people get excited and fanatical if you present them with a fact which does not fit the frame...."589
Also:
"So the archetype is the promoter of ideas and is also responsible for the emotional restrictions which
prevent the renunciation of earlier theories. It is really only a detail or specific aspect of what happens
everywhere in life, for we could not recognize anything without projection; but it is also the main
obstacle to the truth. If one meets an unknown woman, it is not possible to make contact without
projecting something; you must make a hypothesis, which of course is done quite unconsciously: the
woman is elderly and is probably a kind of mother figure, and a normal human being, etc. You make
assumptions and then you have a bridge. When you know the person better, then many earlier
315 





assumptions must be discarded and you must admit that your conclusions were incorrect. Unless this is
done, then you are hampered in your contact.
At first, one has to project, or there is no contact; but then one should be able to correct the
projection, and it is the same not only as regards human beings, but everything else also. The projection
apparatus must of necessity work in us. Nothing can even be seen without the unconscious projection
factor. That is why, according to Indian philosophy, the whole of reality is a projection - which it is, in a
subjective matter of speaking."590
The idea of projection - that is, the idea that scientific systems of thought have "unconscious"axioms - is
clearly related to the notion of "paradigmatic thinking," as outlined by Kuhn, to wide general acclaim. Jung
described the psychological consequences of axiomatic thinking in great detail, as well. He first posed the
question - "What happens to the (paradigmatic) representational structure in someone's mind - (in the
human psyche, in human society) - when anomalous information, of revolutionary import, is finally
accepted as valid?" and then answered it (my summary): "What happens has a pattern; the pattern has a
biological, even genetic, basis, which finds its expression in fantasy; such fantasy provides subject material
for myth and religion. The propositions of myth and religion, in turn, help guide and stabilize revolutionary
human adaptation." These answers have been rejected prematurely and without sufficient consideration.
5.3.2.1.2. Part Two
Where is what you most want to be found?
Where you are least likely to look.
"In sterquiliniis invenitur"591
King Arthur's knights sit at a round table, because they are all equal. They set off to look for the holy grail
- which is a symbol of salvation, container of the "nourishing" blood of Christ, keeper of redemption. Each
knight leaves on his quest, individually. Each knight enters the forest, to begin his search, at the point that
looks darkest to him.
When I was about half way through writing this manuscript, I went to visit my sister-in-law and her
family. She had a son - my nephew - who was about five years old, very verbal and intelligent. He was
deeply immersed in a pretend world, and liked to dress up as a knight, with a plastic helmet and sword.
He was happy during the day, to all appearances - but did not sleep well, and had been having
nightmares for some time. He would regularly scream for his mom in the middle of the night, and appeared
quite agitated by whatever was going on in his imagination.
I asked him one morning after he had woken up what he had dreamed about. He told me, in the presence
of his family, that dwarf-like beaked creatures who came up to his knees had been jumping up at him and
biting him. Each creature was covered with hair and grease, and had a cross shaved in the hair on the top of
its head. The dream also featured a dragon, who breathed fire. After the dragon exhaled, the fire turned into
the dwarves, who multiplied endlessly, with each breath. He told the dream in a very serious voice to his
parents and to my wife and I, and we were shocked by its graphic imagery and horror.
The dream occurred at a transition point in my nephew's life. He was leaving his mother, to go to
kindergarten, and was joining the social world. The dragon, of course, served as symbol for the source of
fear itself - the unknown, the uroboros - while the dwarves were individual things to be afraid of -
particular manifestations of the general unknown.
I asked him, "what could you do about this dragon?"
316 


He said, without hesitation, and with considerable excitement - "I would take my dad, and we would go
after the dragon. I would jump on its head, and poke out its eyes with my sword. Then I would go down its
throat, to where the fire came out. I would cut out the box the fire came from, and make a shield from it."
I thought this was a remarkable answer. He had reproduced an archaic hero myth, in perfect form. The
idea of making a shield from the firebox was nothing short of brilliant. This gave him the power of the
dragon, to use against the dragon.
His nightmares ended at that point, and did not return - even though he had been suffering from them
almost every night for a number of months. I asked his mother about his dreams, more than a year later, and
she reported no further disturbance.
The little boy, guided by his imagination, adopted identification with the hero, and faced his worst
nightmare. If we are to thrive, individually and socially, each of us must do the same. Our great
technological power makes the consequences of our individual errors and weaknesses increasingly serious;
if we wish to continually expand our power, we must also continually expand our wisdom. This is,
unfortunately, a terrible thing to ask.
"In sterquiliniis invenitur" - in filth it will be found. This is perhaps the prime "alchemical" dictum.
What you need most is always to be found where you least wish to look. This is really a matter of
definition. The more profound the error, the more difficult the revolution - the more fear and uncertaintly
released as a consequence of restructuring. The things that are most informative are also frequently most
painful. Under such circumstances, it is easy to run away. The act of running away, however, transforms
the ambivalent unknown into that which is too terrifying to face. Acceptance of anomalous information
brings terror and possibility, revolution and transformation. Rejection of unbearable fact stifles adaptation,
and strangles life. We choose one path or another at every decision point in our lives, and emerge as the
sum total of our choices. In rejecting our errors, we gain short-term security - but throw away our identity
with the process that allows us to transcend our weaknesses, and tolerate our painfully limited lives:
"There was a good man who owned a vineyard. He leased it to tenant farmers so that they might work it
and he might collect the produce from them. He sent his servant so that the tenants might give him the
produce of the vineyard. They seized his servant and beat him, all but killing him. The servant went
back and told his master. The master said, 'perhaps they did not recognize him.' He sent another servant.
The tenants beat this one as well. Then the owner sent his son and said, 'Perhaps they will show respect
to my son.' Because the tenants knew that it was he who was heir to the vineyard, they seized him and
killed him. Let him who has ears hear."
Jesus said, "Show me the stone which the builders have rejected. That one is the cornerstone."592
Face what you reject, accept what you refuse to acknowledge, and you will find the treasure that the dragon
guards.
5.3.2.2. The "Material World" as Archaic "Locus of the Unknown"
"...all these myth pictures represent a drama of the human psyche on the further side of consciousness,
showing man as both the one to be redeemed and the redeemer. The first formulation is Christian, the
second alchemical. In the first case man attributes the need of redemption to himself and leaves the work of
redemption... to the autonomous divine figure; in the latter case man takes upon himself the redeeming
opus, and attributes the state of suffering and consequent need of redemption to the anima mundi (world
spirit) imprisoned in matter."593
Alchemy can be most simply understood as the attempt to produce the philosopher's stone - the lapis
philosophorum. The lapis philosophorum had the ability to turn "base" metals into gold; furthermore, it
conferred upon its bearer immortal life, spiritual peace and good health. The alchemical "procedure"
stretched some twenty centuries, in the west, coming to an end with Newton; it had an equally lengthy and
elaborate history in the Orient.
317 


It is impossible to understand the essence of alchemical thought - or its relevance for modern
psychology - without "entering into" the categorical system of the alchemist. The "stuff" with which the
alchemist worked, although bearing the same name, was only vaguely akin to our modern matter. There are
many ways to cut the world up, and they are not necessarily commensurate. Much of what the alchemist
considered "thing" we would not think of as characteristic of the objective world; furthermore, what he
considered unitary we would think of as evidently diverse. There are two major reasons for this "difference
in opinion."
First: the categorical system used to parse up the world derives its nature in large part from the nature of
the end towards which activity is currently devoted. The ends pursued by the alchemist were by no means
identical to those considered worthwhile today. In large part, they were much more comprehensive (the
"perfection of nature"); in addition, they were "contaminated" with psychological formulations (the
"redemption" of "corrupt" matter). Insofar as the alchemical procedure was psychological - that is, driven
by apprehension of an "ideal state" - the categories it produced were evaluative. Phenomena that emerge in
the course of goal-directed behavior are classified most fundamentally with regards to their relevance, or
irrelevance, to that end. Those that are relevant are further discriminated into those that are useful, and
"good," and those that exist as impediments, and are "bad." Since our behavior is motivated - since it
serves to regulate our emotions - it is very difficult to construct a classification system whose elements are
devoid of evaluative significance. It is only since the emergence of strict empirical methodology that such
construction has been made possible. This means that pre-experimental systems of classification such as
those employed in the alchemical procedure include evaluative appraisal, even when they consist of terms
such as "matter" or "gold," that appear "familiar" to us.
Second: it seems that the more poorly something has been explored, the broader the category used to
"encapsulate" or describe it. As exploration proceeds, finer discrimination becomes possible. Apparently
unitary "things" fall apart, in this manner, into their previously "implicit" constituent elements (as nature is
"carved at her joints"). We no longer consider the traditional "four elements" of the world, for example -
fire, water, earth and air - either as irreducible "elements" or even as categories extant at the same level of
analysis. Further investigation has reconfigured our systems of classification; we have transformed the
comparative simple "material world" of our ancestors into something much more complex, useful and
diverse. We believe, in consequence, that the primordial "elements" of the world were not really elements
at all (failing to realize that an "element" is a "tool," and that an incompletely fashioned tool is still much
better than no tool at all).
The overwhelmingly evaluative dimension of pre-experimental classification, in combination with
relatively poor capacity for discrimination, produced archaic categories of great generality - from the
modern perspective. We can identify many "discriminable phenomena" within each of these categories, as
a consequence of the centuries of increasingly-efficient exploration that separate us from our medieval and
pre-medieval forebears. Our viewpoint has in fact changed to such a degree that our use of the same word
is in many cases only a historical accident. We might therefore make this discussion more concrete by first
examining the "matter" of the alchemist, and by comparing it to what we think of as matter.
Alchemical matter was the "stuff" of which experience was made - and more: the stuff of which the
experiencing creature was made. This "primal element" was something much more akin to "information,"
in the modern sense (or to Tao, from the Oriental perspective); something like matter in the phrases "that
matters" 594 (that makes a difference, that we care about, that cannot be ignored, that is informative) or
"what is the matter?" We derive "information" as a consequence of our exploratory behavior, undertaken
in the "unknown," attending to things that matter; from that information, we build ourselves (our behaviors
and schemas of representation) and the "world," as experienced. As Piaget states:
"Knowledge does not begin in the I, and it does not begin in the object; it begins in the interactions....
then there is a reciprocal and simultaneous construction of the subject on the one hand and the object on
the other."595
The primal element of alchemy was something "embedded" or "implicit" in the world: something often
hidden, that could emerge unexpectedly. This unexpected emergence can be regarded as the "capacity" of
the object to "transcend" its categorical representation (to "become" something new) as a consequence of
its position in a new situation, or its "reaction" to a new exploratory procedure. This "new thing"
318 






"announces itself" first in terms of the affect it generates: failure of the "previously" understood (previously
categorized) thing to behave as predicted elicits emotion from the observer. This is the "spirit of
transformation" making itself manifest. The emotion so generated - fear/hope - may produce exploratory
behavior, designed to specify the "new" properties of the transforming object. These new properties then
become incorporated into the previous categorization system - become "attributes" now seen as "in the
same class"; alternatively, the newly transformed substance may have to "shift categories" because it is
now seen as so much different from "what it was." (The former case constitutes a "normal" shift, of course;
the latter is "revolutionary.")
When a novel thing has been explored, and placed within a certain sociohistorically-determined context,
it has been classified in accordance with its currently evident motivational status: promise, threat,
satisfaction, punishment (or none of the above), as determined, situationally. This is evidently true with
regards to the classification system of the individual animal, who cannot derive an "empirical" model of
reality, because it cannot communicate - but equally true with regards to man, whose capacity for
abstraction has blurred the essential nature and purpose of classification. What a thing is is most
fundamentally its motivational significance - its relevance for the attainment of some affectively significant
goal. Classification of the phenomenon (which means, determination of how to act in its presence) restricts
its motivational significance to a particular domain (most frequently, to nothing, to irrelevance).
Nonetheless, it is a fact that the phenomenon itself (which is of infinite complexity) is always capable of
transcending its representation. This capacity for transcendence is a property of the "object" (a property of
experience, from the phenomenological viewpoint), but can be exploited by the activity of man.
The alchemists regarded the "transcendent capacity of the object" - that is, the capacity of the "familiar
and explored" in one context to become the "unfamiliar and unexplored" in another - as a spirit, embedded
in matter. Jung cites Basilius Valentinus, an ancient alchemical authority:
"... the earth as material is not a dead body, but is inhabited by a spirit that is its life and soul. All
created things, minerals included, draw their strength from the earth-spirit. This spirit is life, it is
nourished by the stars, and it gives nourishment to all the living things it shelters in its womb. Through
the spirit received from on high, the earth hatches the minerals in her womb as the mother her unborn
child. This invisible spirit is like the reflection in a mirror, intangible, yet it is at the same time the root
of all the substances necessary to the alchemical process or arising therefrom."596
The "spirit that inhabits the earth" was Mercurius, the shape-shifter (the reflected image of God in
matter,597 from the alchemical viewpoint) who both "guided" the alchemical process and was "released" by
the activities of the alchemist. Mercurius was the spirit that made the "matter" investigated by the adept
interesting, compelling - and interest is a "spirit" that moves from place to place, as knowledge changes
and grows. Mercurius is the incarnation of transformation, the uroboros, who existed (and did not exist) as
the most primal deity, before the creation of things (before the division of the world into subject and object,
spirit and matter, known and unknown). The uroboros is, of course, the tail-eater, the dragon of chaos: an
image of the embeddedness of the totality of things across time in the particular manifest phenomenon. The
image of the spirit Mercurius was an intimation of the infinite potential "trapped" in every particular aspect
of experience.598 Identification of this "potential" - that is, its classification - posed a constant problem to
the medieval imagination:
"All through the Middle Ages [Mercurius] was the object of much puzzled speculation on the part of the
natural philosophers: sometimes he was a ministering and helpful spirit, an [assistant, comrade or
familiar]; and sometimes the servus or cervus fugitivus (the fugitive slave or stag), an elusive, deceptive,
teasing goblin who drove the alchemists to despair and had many of his attributes in common with the
devil. For instance he is dragon, lion, eagle, raven to mention only the most important of them. In the
alchemical hierarchy of gods Mercurius comes lowest as prima materia and highest as lapis
philosophorum. The spiritus mercurialis is the alchemists' guide (Hermes Psychopompos), and their
tempter: he is their good luck and their ruin."599
The alchemists "conflated" what we would think of as matter with what we might regard as the
unknown. This is hardly surprising, since "matter" was "the unknown" to the pre-scientific mind (and is
319 






still something that retains much of its mystery today). As the "unknown," matter possessed an "attraction,"
which was the affective valence of what had not yet been explored. This property of the unknown to
"attract" comprised ground for its personification as "spirit" - as that which motivates or directs. Matter -
even in its modern form - can easily revert to "the unknown," even under modern conditions; can then
exercise a similar "force" (that of a "stimulus") on the modern psyche. It does so when it manifests
something anomalous - some unforeseen property, as a consequence of its placement in a new context, or
its subjection to more creative exploration. The anomalous manifestation - the recurrence of the unknown -
comes inevitably to attract increasing interest (or, conversely, attempts to avoid, suppress, or otherwise
conjure it out of existence). All objects - even "explored objects" retain their connection with "that from
which all things are made," even after they have been boxed and filed away (been categorized), in theory,
"once and for all."
Take a rat, for example, who has "habituated" to a cage (who has explored the cage, and become
comfortable there). If a small object - say, an iron block - is dropped in front of it, it will first freeze, and
then cautiously begin to investigate. The rat will use its capacity for motoric action to interact with the
block - smelling it, looking at it, scratching it, perhaps gnawing it - to assess the motivational significance
of the novel object. For the rat - limited by its lack of communicative ability to its own experience; limited
by its restricted animal nature to fundamental processes of exploration - the block soon becomes irrelevant.
It signifies no danger, in the course of interaction; it cannot be eaten; it is useless as nesting material.... The
block therefore "becomes" its lack of relevant properties, for the no-longer exploratory rat, and will
henceforth be ignored. The process of exploration-predicated classification has eliminated the motivational
significance of the novel - as is its function. From the mythic perspective, this is replacement of the "Great
Mother" by the "Great Father"; replacement of ambivalent threat and promise by determinate valence
(including irrelevance).
The sensory properties of the block - which are the relevant features of the object, as far as the spirit of
scientific inquiry extends - have no intrinsic importance for the rat, except as they signify something of
affective import. This more fundamental mode of thought, concerned with behavioral adaptation to
circumstance, is how man thought, prior to the formalization of scientific methodology - and how man
thinks still, insofar as he values and acts. The general case is, however, more complex. Homo sapiens is
capable of observing a practically infinite series of novel properties emerge from the particular object,
because he is capable of apprehending an object from a virtually unlimited number of points of perspective,
spatial and temporal - or, it might be considered, equivalently, that the "object" is something so complex
that it can manifest entirely different properties, merely in consequence of being viewed from alternative
perspectives. The iron block was once, "of its own accord," something qualitatively different from what it
is now, and will be something different, once again, in the future. In the earliest stages of its existence,
considered as an independent object, the exemplary block was part of an undifferentiated totality, prior to
the beginning of all things; then, the interplay of four fundamental forces; then simple hydrogen, coalescing
into a star; then, matter transformed by gravity and nuclear processes; then a rock on Earth; finally,
something transformed by man - with a still uncompleted and equally extensive developmental history
before it. This transformation of the object is temporality itself - the manifestation of Tao, the flux of
being. The capacity of human beings to apprehend variable spatial-temporal spans "turns" the object into
something more complex than its mere present appearance; this increase in "complexity" is compounded
by the extended active capacity for exploration also typical of our species.
What is an iron block for man? Shaped, a spear, and therefore food and death and security; suspended, a
pendulum, key to measurement of the earth's rotation; dropped, significant of gravity, and the large-scale
structure of the universe; reduced to its constituent particles, with sufficient patience and ingenuity,
representative of molecular and atomic structure - a part like the whole. The question might be more
accurately presented - what is an iron block not, for man? The pre-experimental mind of the alchemist,
pondering the nature of the prima materia - the "fundamental constituent element of experience" - easily
became possessed by intimations of the infinite possibility of "matter": of the boundless significance of the
finite object; of the endless utility of the object, and its inexhaustible capacity to reveal (become) the
unknown.
When an object is explored, its motivational significance is constrained [generally, as a consequence of
the specific goal-directed nature of the exploratory process, inevitably predicated upon a specific
320 














hypothesis - is this thing good for (a particular function? - but not any number of other potential
functions)]. The question in mind, implicit or explicitly formulated, determines in part the answer "given"
by the object. The object is always capable of superseding the constraint, in some unpredictable fashion.
This infinite potential finds its symbolic expression in the self-devouring serpent, the mercurial spirit of
transformation - the spirit that draws interest inexorably to itself.
While considering these ideas, I dreamed that a small object was travelling above the surface of the
Atlantic Ocean. It moved along in the center of a procession of four immense hurricanes, configured as
a square divided into quadrants, one quadrant per hurricane, tracked by satellites, monitored carefully
and apprehensively by scientists manning the latest in meteorological equipment, in stations all over the
world.
The dream scene shifted. The object, a sphere of about eight inches in diameter, was now contained
and exhibited in a small glass display case, like that found in a museum. The case itself was in a small
room, with no visible exit or entry points. The American President - symbol of social order - and the
crippled physicist Steven Hawkins - representative of scientific knowledge (and of disembodied
rationality) - were in the room with the object. One of them described the features of the room. Its walls
were seven feet thick, and made of some impervious substance [titanium dioxide (?)] - which sounded
impressive, in the context of the dream. These walls were designed to permanently contain the object. I
wasn't in the room, although I was there as an observer, like the audience in a movie. The object in the
display case appeared alive. It was moving, and distorting its shape, like a chrysalis or a cocoon in its
later stages of development. At one point, it transformed itself into something resembling a meerschaum
pipe. Then it reformed itself into a sphere, and shot out through one wall of the case, and the room,
leaving two perfectly round, smooth, holes - one in the case, and the other in the wall. It left with no
effort whatsoever, as if the barriers designed to restrain its movement were of no consequence, once the
"decision" had been made.
The object was an image of God, the uroboric serpent, embodied in matter (powerful enough to
require the accompaniment of four hurricanes, as attendants).600 The room was a classification system,
something designed (by the most powerful representatives of the social and scientific worlds), to
constrain the mysterious phenomenon. The object transformed itself into a pipe in reference to the
famous painting (by Magritte) of a pipe, entitled (in translation) "This is not a pipe" - the map is not
the territory, the representation not the phenomenon. The capacity of the object to escape, "at will"
referred to the eternal transcendence of the phenomenal world, of its infinite capacity to unexpectedly
supersede its representation, scientific and mythic.
I dreamed, much later (perhaps after a year) of a man suspended, equidistant from the floor, ceiling
and walls, in a cubic room - about arm's length from each. The surfaces of the cube curved inwards,
towards the man (as if the room was constructed of the intersection of six spheres). All surfaces of the
cube remained at the same distance from the man, regardless of his pattern of movement. If he walked
forward, the cube moved forward with him. If he walked backward, the cube moved backwards, at
precisely the same rate, with no discontinuity whatsoever. The surfaces themselves were covered with
circular patterns, about four inches in diameter, inscribed within squares of about the same size. Out of
the center of each circle dangled the tip of a reptile's tail. The man could reach in any direction, grasp a
tail, and pull it out of the surface, into the room.
This dream referred to the capacity of man to (voluntarily) pull the future into the present, so to
speak. The serpent - evident only in the form of his tail -was the uroboros, embedded implicitly in the
phenomenal world.601 The potential for the emergence of something new was present in every direction
the man could look, inside the cube. He could determine what aspect of being would reveal itself, as a
consequence of his voluntary action.
The act of exploration produces/elicits discriminable phenomena. These phenomena are mapped by the
episodic and semantic "memory" systems. The exploratory process, however, is guided by the maps
produced by the episodic system - particularly by its maps of the future. A desired end is posited, in
fantasy. The motoric/abstract exploration system endeavors to bring about a match between emergent
321 




phenomena (produced in the course of activity) and that "map of the desired future." Mismatches between
production and goal elicit (re)appearance of "the base matter of the world" - the unknown, manifest in
negative affect, and curiosity.
The individual attempts to transform his wishes (rooted, in the final analysis, in emotion) into reality,
suffering - and learning - when that process is disrupted. Exploration is deemed sufficient - and may justly
come to an end - when the current affective state is deemed optimal: when knowledge, translated into
action, has adjusted the world such that it is (once again) "paradisal." In the absence of such a paradisal
state (in the absence of current security, happiness), exploration is or has been, by definition, incomplete.
The "residual mysteries" that still accompany current being, which manifest themselves in the intrinsic
attractiveness of the thing or situation (which manifest themselves in interest), must therefore become the
focus of active attention, so that the "information" embedded in them can be "pulled out," and transformed
into subjective being and the world. The alchemical "base matter" of the world was, therefore, "the stuff of
which determinate experience (subject and object) was made"; was something, in addition, capable of
endless transformation; was something, finally, "corrupt" - as the material world was corrupt - incomplete,
unrealized, fallen and suffering.
Analysis of the pre-experimental "category" of gold helps shed light on the relevance, importance and
meaning of this archaic "complex of undiscriminated ideas." Gold - as ultimate contrast to mere "base
matter" - was the ideal, as it could be perceived in the concrete world. For the pre-experimental man, as
well as for the modern, gold served as a medium of economic exchange. But the value of the metal did not,
and still does not, consist solely in its economic utility. Gold has always been associated, in episodic
representation, with divinity. Prior to development of the scientific world-view, this association made
perfect sense. Gold, in contrast to "lesser" metals or substances, does not tarnish, dull or rust. It therefore
appears imperishable, "immortal," and incorruptible. Gold is rare, rather than common. It shines like the
sun, the evident source of life. The "category" of gold therefore tended to subsume everything Appolinian,
sun-like, divine (in the patriarchal/heroic sense we have become familiar with). Jung describes the
characteristic presumptions of the alchemist Michael Maier:
"The sun, by its many millions of revolutions, spins the gold into the earth. Little by little the sun has
imprinted its image on the earth, and that image is the gold. The sun is the image of God, the heart is the
sun's image in man, just as gold is the sun's image in the earth, and God is known in the gold."602
The light of the sun is a "symbol" for power and the transcendence of clarity and consciousness, of heroism
and permanence, of victory over the forces of darkness, disintegration, and decay. The earliest patriarchal
gods and leaders of men combined the life-giving attributes of the sun with the heroic ideals of man, and
the coins that bore their likeness were round and golden, in imitation of the solar disk.
Gold was, furthermore, the ideal end towards which all ores progressed - was "the target of
progression." As it "ripened" in the womb of the earth, lead - for example, base and promiscuous [willing
to "mate" (combine) with many other substances] - aimed at the state characterized by gold, perfect and
inviolable. This made the "gold state" the goal of the Mercurial "spirit of the unknown," embedded in
matter. Eliade states:
"If nothing impedes the process of gestation, all ores will, in time, become gold. 'If there were no
exterior obstacles to the execution of her designs,' wrote a Western alchemist, 'Nature would always
complete what she wished to produce.... That is why we have to look upon the births of imperfect metals
as we would on abortions and freaks which come about only because Nature has been, as it were,
misdirected, or because she has encountered some fettering resistance....
Belief in the natural metamorphosis of metals is of very ancient origin in China and it is also found in
Annam, in India and in the Indian archipelago. The peasants of Tonkin have a saying: 'Black bronze is
the mother of gold.' Gold is engendered naturally by bronze. But this transmutation can materialize only
if the bronze has lain a sufficiently long period in the bosom of the earth..."603
The alchemist viewed himself as midwife to Nature - as bringing to fruition what Nature endeavoured
slowly to produce - and therefore as aid to a transformation aimed at producing something ideal. "Gold" is
that ideal. Eliade continues:
322 




"The 'nobility' of gold is thus the fruit at its most mature; the other metals are 'common' because they
are crude; 'not ripe.' In other words, Nature's final goal is the completion of the mineral kingdom, its
ultimate 'maturation.' The natural transmutation of metals into gold is inscribed in their destiny. The
tendency of Nature is to perfection. But since gold is the bearer of a highly spiritual symbolism ('Gold is
immortality', say the Indian texts repeatedly), it is obvious that a new idea is coming into being: the idea
of the part assumed by the alchemist as the brotherly savior of Nature. He assists Nature to fulfil her
final goal, to attain her 'ideal,' which is the perfection of its progeny - be it mineral, animal or human -
to its supreme ripening, which is absolute immortality and liberty...."604
The alchemists lived in a world that had theoretically been "redeemed," by the sacrifice of Christ - at
least from the Christian perspective. But they did not feel redeemed - were not satisfied with the present
still-too mortal condition. So they turned their attention to those aspects of the world that had been defined,
in accordance with prevailing morality, as "unworthy of examination," as corrupt and contemptible.
Presuming - or hoping - that things might yet be better, they explored (as we explore now, hoping to
extract from the "unknown" new and useful tools). The alchemists assumed, implicitly, that further
exploration might bring redemptive knowledge. This search was driven by their admission of the
"unbearable present" - by their identification with a "still-fallen world." The alchemists believed that the
"desirable transmutation of matter" could be brought about by the "release" of Mercurius from matter. This
meant that they implicitly recognized that (interest-guided) exploration was key to the (redemptive)
expansion of being.
In participating in this process, the alchemists "identified with" the exploratory hero, and turned
themselves "unconsciously" (that is, in procedure, if not always in representation) into "that which
redeems." This identification was complicated by the fact that the alchemist also considered himself as
partaking of the state of matter - as belonging in the "state necessitating redemption." This basically meant
that the alchemist viewed himself, at least in part, as in the same category as "matter" (as well as being that
which could become "gold," and which could aid in that transformation). For the pre-experimental mind,
after all - with its more general and conflated categories - there is no necessary distinction between the
"thing begin acted on" and the "thing doing the acting." Eliade describes, for example, the "sympathetic
magic" necessary to make a grafting operation between two different species of plants take (to induce
"unlike to mate with unlike," from a broader perspective):
"Ibn Washya - and he is not the only oriental writer to allow himself to be carried away by such images
- speaks of fantastic graftings ('contrary to Nature') between differing vegetable species. He says, for
instance, that the grafting of a branch of a lemon tree on to a laurel or olive tree would produce very
small lemons, the size of olives. But he makes it clear that the graft could succeed only if it was
performed in the ritual manner and at a certain conjunction of the sun and moon. He explains the rite
thus: 'the branch to be grafted must be held in the hands of a very beautiful maiden, while a man is
having shameful and unnatural sexual intercourse with her; during coitus the girl grafts the branch onto
the tree.' The significance is clear: in order to ensure an 'unnatural' union in the vegetable world an
unnatural sexual union between human beings was necessary."605
Such ideas are far from rare. Virtually every process undertaken by pre-experimental individuals - from
agriculture to metallurgy - was accompanied by rituals designed to "bring about the state of mind" or
"illustrate the procedure" necessary to the successful outcome desired. This is because the action precedes
the idea. So ritual sexual unions accompanied sowing of the earth, and sacrificial rituals and their like
abounded among miners, smiths and potters. Nature had to be "shown what to do"; man led, not least, by
example. The correct procedure could only be brought about by those who had placed themselves in the
correct state of mind. This idea was taken to its logical conclusion during the alchemical procedure - which
had as its fantastical "end-state" or desired future the most profound and far-reaching notion of
transformation ever conceptualized: the "final perfection" or "redemption" of matter.
To induce disparate elements to combine harmoniously in the production of the lapis philosophorum -
that which will transmute "base metals" into "gold" - it was necessary to become unified oneself. To
engender perfection from nature, therefore, man had to become perfect. The necessity for the perfection of
the alchemist - and the relation of the alchemical procedure to his own being - was further strengthened by
323 









his "identity" with the material world (that is, by his occupation of the same "categorical space" as
"matter"). Man - a fallen, corrupt, material being, yet capable of endless transformation - partook of the
essence of the fallen, corrupt, yet transformable material world. Those things relevant to the transformation
of the being of "objects" were therefore also, by logical necessity, relevant to the transformation of his own
being. The transformation of "base matter" into gold, writ large, was the redemption of the world - its
transformation into the "state of gold." The lapis philosophorum was means to that end. Man leads nature
not least by example. This "extension of the theories of sympathetic magic" to the domain of "chemistry"
meant that alchemy became increasingly rife with (primarily imagistic) speculation regarding the nature of
perfection, as it developed over the centuries.
It is difficult for moderns to realize why any of this might be relevant. Our psychology and psychiatry -
our "sciences of the mind" - are devoted, at least in theory, to "empirical" evaluation and treatment of
mental "disorders." But this is mostly screen and smoke. We are aiming, always, at an ideal. We currently
prefer to leave the nature of that ideal "implicit," because that helps us sidestep any number of issues that
would immediately become of overwhelming difficulty, if they were clearly apprehended. So we "define"
health as that state consisting of an absence of "diseases" or "disorders" and leave it at that - as if the
notion of disease or disorder is not by necessity a medieval concatenation of moral philosophy and
empirical description. It is our implicit theory that a state of "non-anxiety" (or optimal anxiety) is possible,
however - and desirable - that leads us to define dominance by that state as "disordered." The same might
be said for depression, for schizophrenia, for personality-"disorders," etc., etc. Lurking in the background is
an "implicit" (that is, unconscious) ideal, against which all "insufficient" present states are necessarily -
and detrimentally - compared. We do not know how to make that ideal explicit, either methodologically or
practically (that is, without causing immense dissent in the ranks); we "know," however, that we must have
a concept of "not ideal" in order to begin - and to justify - "necessary" treatment. Sooner or later, however,
we will have to come to terms with the fact that we are in fact attempting to produce "the ideal man" - and
will have to define explicitly what that means. It would be surprising, indeed, if the ideal we come to posit
bore no relationship to that constructed painstakingly, over the course of centuries of effort, in the past.
Something very similar happened in the case of alchemy, at least in the West: as the procedure continued,
through the Christian era, the lapis was increasingly identified with Christ. There is no reason to presume
that this came as anything but a surprise to the alchemists themselves. We are in for a shock at least as
great.
To perfect nature, it was necessary to harbour the correct attitude - to undertake the appropriate rituals
and processes of spiritual purification; to become pure as the thing desired. The worker stood as example to
nature, in small things and great. In the great case of alchemy - which ambitiously desired to "redeem" the
fallen material world - the alchemist himself had to become great. Thus the alchemical literature might be
regarded, in part, as one long "meditation," on the nature of the ideal man.
5.3.2.3. Episodic Representation in Medieval Christendom
Science is predicated upon the axiomatic presupposition that it is worthwhile to devote effort towards
analysis of the material or collectively apprehensible sensory world and its transformations. This belief,
which first manifested itself in (alchemical) fantasy, is so much a part of the modern world, so much its
primary assumption, that it is difficult to realize what a remarkable achievement its formalization
represented. It took thousands of years of cultural development to formulate the twin notions that empirical
reality existed (independently of the motivational significance of things) and that it should be
systematically studied (and these ideas only emerged, initially, in the complex societies of the Orient and
Europe). The alchemists were the first to risk this attribution, or something similar to it; but they still
studied "matter" in the absence of explicit empirical methodology. Jung states:
"... the concept of the "psychic," as we understand it today, did not exist in the Middle Ages, and even
the educated modern man finds it difficult to understand what is meant by "reality of the psyche." So it
is not surprising that it was incomparably more difficult for medieval man to imagine something
between "esse in re" and "esse in intellectu solo." The way out lay in "metaphysics." The alchemist was
therefore compelled to formulate his quasichemical facts metaphysically too."606
324 







The lack of scientific methodology - the inability to conduct formalized comparison of behaviorpredicated
experience, to determine its generalizability - meant the inextricable admixture of the purely
sensory and the subjective, affective, mythological aspects of experience. The purpose of scientific
methodology, in large part, is to separate the empirical facts from the motivational presumption. In the
absence of such methodology, the intermingling of the two domains is inevitable:
"[The alchemists]... believed that they were studying the unknown phenomenon of matter... and they
just observed what came up and interpreted that, somehow, but without any specific plan. There would
be a lump of some strange matter, but as they did not know what it was they conjectured something or
other, which of course would be unconscious projection, but there was no definite intention or tradition.
Therefore one could say that in alchemy, projections were made [hypotheses were generated] most
naively and unprogrammatically, and completely uncorrected.
Imagine an old alchemist's situation. A man in a certain village would build an isolated hut and cook
things which caused explosions. Quite naturally, everyone calls him a witch doctor! One day someone
comes and says he has found a queer piece of metal and would the alchemist be interested in buying it?
The alchemist does not know the value of the metal, but gives the man some money at a guess. He then
puts what has been brought him in his stove and mixes it with sulphur, or something similar, to see what
happens, and if the metal was lead, he would be badly poisoned by the vapours. He concludes, therefore,
that this particular matter makes one feel sick if approached, and nearly kills you, and therefore he says
that there is a demon in lead! Afterwards, when he writes his recipes, he adds a footnote saying:
"Beware of lead, for in it is a demon which will kill people and make them mad," which would be quite
an obvious and reasonable explanation for someone of that time and level. Therefore lead was a
wonderful subject for the projection of destructive factors, since in certain connections its effects are
poisonous. Acid substances were also dangerous, but, on the other hand, being corrosive and a means of
dissolving things, were highly important for chemical operations. Thus if you wished to melt something
or have it in liquid form it could be melted or dissolved in acid solutions, and for this reason the
projection was that acid was the dangerous substance which dissolves, but which also makes it possible
to handle certain substances. Or else it is a medium of transformation - you open up, so to speak, a
metal with which you can do nothing and make it accessible to transformation by the use of certain
liquids. The alchemists therefore wrote about it in the naive form which I am now describing and did not
notice that that was not natural science but contained a lot of projection, if looked at from a modern
chemical standpoint.
Thus there exists in alchemy an astonishing amount of material from the unconscious, produced in a
situation where the conscious mind did not follow a definite program, but only searched."607
Alchemy flourished for almost two thousand years, and only faded from view in the late eighteenth
century. It developed (at least in the Middle Ages) as a movement compensating that embodied in
absolutist Christianity, which emphasized the ultimate reality and value of the spirit, dogmatically
concretized; which presumed that everything worth knowing had already been discovered; and which cast
the material world into disrepute.
For the medieval mind, the body, the sensory, physical world - "matter," in general - was valued as
immoral and as corrupt, as ruled by demonic, unknown forces. The story of Genesis - serpent and Eve
conspiring to bring about the descent of mankind "into the profane and fallen (material) world" - in part
provided the mythological "basis" for this union of category. The "attractions" of the material world also
posed a threat to identification with the Church, as the pull of sensuality, for example, or the desire for
material instead of spiritual wealth. Furthermore, the fact of the fallen material state undermined faith in
Church dogma: apprehension of the unresolved suffering of man made it difficult to attribute to Christ's
actions the final state of redemption they theoretically guaranteed. In consequence, contact with the
"matriarchal underworld of matter" (that is, with the "unknown") seemed very threatening to the Church
authorities - and for very good reason (at least from the perspectives of conservation and tradition).
Alchemical fascination with "matter" developed antithetically to the early Christian valuation of the
"spiritual" and the "established" (developed as an antithesis to the domain of the known). The suppression
of the sensory material world by the Church, and the simultaneous establishment of an absolute body of
325 






knowledge, meant rejection or denial of anomalous sensory/emotional experience, and therefore of the
value contained in those experiences. Alchemical preoccupation with matter arose as a consequence of this
lost value asserting itself, so to speak, in the attraction of the accumulated "rejected and unknown" - in the
inevitable attraction of the "forbidden fruit."
Observing what he did not understand, the alchemist had recourse only to speculation, which he used to
interpret that unknown. These speculations look like fantasies to the modern mind - like the fantasies of the
medieval Christian (and pre-Christian, in some cases):
"So, in a sense, they are, and for this reason thy lend themselves to decipherment by the method of
complex psychology. [The alchemical approach]... is so patently a spiritual and moral attitude that one
cannot doubt its psychological nature. To our way of thinking, this immediately sets up a dividing wall
between the psychic and the chemical process. For us the two things are incommensurable, but they
were not so for the medieval mind. It knew nothing of the nature of chemical substances and their
combination. It saw only enigmatic substances which, united with one another, inexplicably brought
forth equally mysterious new substances. In this profound darkness the alchemist's fantasy had free play
and could playfully combine the most inconceivable things. It could act without restraint and, in so
doing, portray itself without being aware of what was happening."608
The alchemist thought in a medieval fashion - or pre-medieval - using archaic preconceptions and
ideas. Analysis of that thought, "projected" upon matter (just as we interpret "matter" in the light of our
own, current and therefore invisible theories) therefore means interpretation of fantasy - means analysis of
the spontaneous productions of the exploring mind (and, therefore, means increased capacity to understand
the workings of mind). The entire corpus of alchemy contains seventeen hundred years of fantasy,
regarding the nature of (moral) transformation, assumed to take place in "matter," (a category that included
"man") "striving" as it did "naturally" towards perfection. Central to this "movement towards perfection"
was the dissolution, transformation and reconstitution of unredeemed primal matter - the prima materia:
"As is indicated by the very name which he chose for it - the "spagyric" art - or by the oft-repeated
saying "solve et coagula" [dissolve and reconstitute], the alchemist saw the essence of his art in
separation and analysis on the one hand and synthesis and consolidation on the other. For him there was
first of all an initial state in which opposite tendencies or forces were in conflict; secondly there was the
great question of a procedure which would be capable of bringing the hostile elements and qualities,
once they were separated, back to unity again. The initial state, named the chaos, was not given from the
start, but had to be sought for as the prima materia. And just as the beginning of the work was not selfevident,
so to an even greater degree was its end. There are countless speculations on the nature of the
endstate, all of them reflected in its designations. The commonest are the ideas of its permanence
(prolongation of life, immortality, uncorruptibility), its androgyny, its spirituality and corporeality, its
human qualities and resemblance to man (homunculus), and its divinity." 609
The alchemists began their work, their opus, by determining to face the unknown, locked away in the
material world, in the pursuit of an ideal. Their ideal was symbolized by the lapis philosophorum, which
was a unitary substance characterized by its ability to transform base metals into gold, and more - which
could confer upon its bearer complete knowledge, immortal life, and impeccable mental and physical
health. The medieval individual had no idea that the creation of such a "substance" was not possible, and
was aware of many substances that had transformative properties.
Identification of what motivated such a pursuit appears straightforward. There were undoubtedly many
who tried their hand at alchemy, purely for its potential economic benefit, just as their are many today, who
pursue their occupation solely for material gain. (Even this is a form of desire for redemption, however -
through material means - and may be unexpectedly transformed into a more purely spiritual pursuit in the
course of maturation, or through the unpredictable actions of fantasy and circumstance.) There were also
alchemists who more clearly embodied the spirit of devout curiosity, and who worked with the same
serious discipline as the later natural scientist. It is dangerous to underestimate the power and the mystery
of the fantasy of the philosopher's stone. This idea provided the motive power underlying disciplined
investigation into the secrets of matter - a difficult, painstaking, expensive procedure. The idea that matter
326 



contained locked within it the secret to wisdom, health and wealth underlies the entire opus of modern
science. The fact that such an idea could arise, and be seriously entertained in spite of grandiosity and
conflict with Church dogma, is difficult enough to believe. It becomes truly incomprehensible, when
consideration is given to the additional fact that the procedure extended over seventeen centuries, in spite of
the fact that no alchemist every reached his goal. Jung states:
"In view of the fact that... a miracle never did occur in the retort, despite repeated assertions that
someone had actually succeeded in making gold, and that neither a panacea nor an elixir has
demonstrably prolonged a human life beyond its due, and that no homunculus has ever flown out of the
furnace - in view of this totally negative result we must ask on what the enthusiasm and infatuation of
the adepts could possibly have been based.
In order to answer this difficult question one must bear in mind that the alchemists, guided by their
keenness for research, were in fact on a hopeful path since the fruit that alchemy bore after centuries of
endeavor was chemistry and its staggering discoveries. The emotional dynamism of alchemy is largely
explained by a premonition of these then unheard-of-possibilities. However barren of useful or even
enlightening results its labours were, these efforts, notwithstanding their chronic failure, seem to have
had a psychic effect of a positive nature, something akin to satisfaction or even a perceptible increase in
wisdom. Otherwise it would be impossible to explain why the alchemists did not turn away in disgust
from their almost invariably futile projects."610
The alchemical fantasy provided (and still provides) the motive power for the empirical endeavor, just
as the dream of Judeo-Christianity laid the groundwork for the civilization of the west. In this manner,
myth, mysterious, absurd, and incomprehensible, stands at the vanguard of the adaptive process. Eliade
states (with specific regard to the origin of science):
"Until recently, few were aware of Isaac Newton's role in this general [alchemical] movement, whose
goal was the renovatio of European religion and culture by means of an audacious synthesis of the
occult traditions and the natural sciences. It is true that Newton never published the results of his
alchemical experiments, although he declared that some of them were crowned with success. His
innumerable alchemical manuscripts, ignored until 1940, have recently been meticulously analyzed by
Betty Jo Teeter Dobbs in her book The Foundations of Newton's Alchemy (1975). Dobbs affirms that
Newton experimented in his laboratory with the operations described in the immense alchemical
literature, probing the latter "as it has never been probed before or since" (p. 88). With the aid of
alchemy, Newton hoped to discover the structure of the microuniverse in order to homologize it with his
cosmological system. The discovery of gravity, the force which keeps the planets in their orbits, did not
completely satisfy him. But although he pursued the experiments indefatigably from 1669 to 1696, he
did not succeed in identifying the forces which govern the corpuscles. Nevertheless, when he began to
study the dynamics of orbital movement in 1679-80, he applied his "chemical" conceptions of attraction
to the universe.
As McGuire and Rattansi have shown, Newton was convinced that in the beginning, 'God had
imparted the secrets of natural philosophy and of true religion to a select few. The knowledge was
subsequently lost but partially recovered later, at which time it was incorporated in fables and mythic
formulations where it would remain hidden from the vulgar. In modern days it could be more fully
recovered from experience.'611 For this reason, Newton examined the most esoteric sections of the
alchemical literature, hoping that they would contain the true secrets. It is significant that the founder of
modern mechanics did not reject the tradition of a primordial and secret revelation, just as he did not
reject the principle of transmutation. As he wrote in his Optics (1704), 'the change of Bodies into Light
and of Light into Bodies is entirely in conformity with the Laws of Nature, for Nature seems ravished by
Transmutation.' According to Dobbs, 'Newton's alchemical thoughts were so securely established that
he never came to deny their general validity, and in a sense the whole of his career after 1675 may be
seen as one long attempt to integrate alchemy and the mechanical philosophy' (Foundations, p. 230).
After the publication of the Principia, opponents declared that Newton's 'forces' were in reality
'occult qualities.' As Dobbs recognizes, in a certain sense these critics were right: 'Newton's forces
327 




were very much like the hidden sympathies and antipathies found in much of the occult literature of the
Renaissance period. But Newton had given forces an ontological status equivalent to that of matter and
motion. By so doing, and by quantifying the forces, he enabled the mechanical philosophies to rise
above the level of imaginary impact mechanisms' (p. 211). In analyzing the Newtonian conception of
force, Richard Westfall arrives at the conclusion that modern science is the result of the wedding of the
Hermetic tradition with the mechanical philosophy. 612
In its spectacular flight, 'modern science' has ignored, or rejected, the heritage of Hermeticism. Or to
put it differently, the triumph of Newtonian mechanics has ended up by annihilating its own scientific
ideal. In effect, Newton and his contemporaries expected a different type of scientific revolution. In
prolonging and developing the hopes and objectives (the first among these being the redemption of
Nature) of the neo-alchemist of the Renaissance, minds as different as those of Paracelsus, John Dee,
Comenius, J. V. Andreae, Fludd, and Newton saw in alchemy the model for a no less ambitious
enterprise: the perfection of man by a new method of knowledge. In their perspective, such a method
had to integrate into a nonconfessional Christianity the Hermetic tradition and the natural sciences of
medicine, astronomy, and mechanics. In fact, this synthesis constituted a new Christian creation,
comparable to the brilliant results obtained by the earlier integrations of Platonism, Aristotelianism, and
Neoplatonism. This type of 'knowledge,' dreamed of and partially elaborated in the eighteenth century,
represents the last enterprise of Christian Europe that was undertaken with the aim of obtaining a 'total
knowledge.' "613
Not precisely the last.
Formulation of the idea that God might be known in material form meant positing the possibility that the
highest value conceivable might be embodied concretely in "matter" - rather than in the established,
patriarchal, "spiritual," world. This meant that the "nature of God" was something that could be made
subject to material (and thoughtful) investigation. Attribution of the highest value to the physical world
provided the motive force for the development of science, during the Renaissance, and provides the basis
for its continuance today. However, matter remained comparatively unknown, to the medieval mind - and
was therefore "contaminated" with everything else unknown, repressed and rejected. The assignment of
value to matter was therefore attribution of value to unknown experience. This assignment was heretical,
because it implied the fallibility or incomplete nature of Church dogma (the formalized medieval European
general model of expectation and desire), and was therefore dangerous, from the intrapsychic and the social
viewpoints. Such heresy was compounded in severity, because the Church explicitly regarded matter -
representative of the inadmissible unknown - as degraded, and defined it as corrupt, imperfect, and
demonic.
The alchemist was an unredeemed, suffering man, in search of an inexpressible ideal. He formulated
that ideal, and its process of generation, using terms that referred to "the physical world," at least from the
modern perspective. However, the alchemist made no clear distinction between psychological and
objective. His "search for the ideal" was therefore as much psychological as chemical (more, actually, since
he worked in the absence even of the basic tools of modern science). The alchemist posited that the answer
lay outside the Church, in the unknown. Exploration of the unknown and forbidden meant generation of
redemptive knowledge (then, as it does now). Incorporation of such knowledge meant movement towards
perfection. So - broadly speaking - the alchemist wanted to transform every subordinate element in the
category "matter" (the unknown, fallen, corrupt world, including man as "material" being) into the category
"gold" (the Apollinian, spiritual, sunlike, incorruptible state). He was searching for a transformative agent
to bring about that change (the lapis philosophorum); but also viewed himself as that agent (since he was
integrally involved in the transformative opus of alchemy). This relatively straightforward
conceptualization of "movement towards the ideal" is schematically presented in Figure 62: The
Alchemical Opus as "Normal Story."
The alchemist courageously posited that the work of redemption held up as absolute by the Church was
not yet complete - or at least acted "as if" there was still "work to be done." So he hoped to turn what was
still unredeemed into gold. The problem is, of course, that turning "base matter" into "gold" is not possible,
as a "normal" act of movement from point "a" - the "unbearable present" - to point "b" - the desirable future. The attempt to produce the "most ideal state possible," however - something akin to paradise on
earth - is particularly unlikely, without a revolution. So the alchemical "story" rapidly turned into
something more complex - something that essentially recapitulated the "union of the gods" (something
very like an initiation process; something very like Solzhenitsyn's spiritual transformation in the Gulag).
The alchemists soon came to realize that movement towards the ideal did not mean an unbroken journey
uphill; soon came to realized that a large leap forward was necessarily preceded by a radical descent.

Figure 62: The Alchemical Opus as "Normal Story
Once the alchemist had decided to look into the unknown for salvation, rather than to the Chuch (or at
least in addition to the Church), he placed himself outside the protective confines of his previous system of
classification. Outside that dogmatic system, things took on new meaning (or at least new potential
meaning). Once you have decided that you don't know absolutely everything about something, it is
possible to learn something new. However, when an "object" has been placed in a system of classification
(within the constraints of a particular paradigm), its a priori motivational significance is constrained
(entirely, in the case of something deemed irrelevant; partially, when the phenomenon is assigned a
particular use). When the classification system fails (as a consequence of the transformation of the
environment, natural or social, or, more prosaically, because of the emergence of incongruent experience
(paradigm-threatening information) the phenomena previously constrained in their motivational
significance regain their original status. That means that objects of experience are renovelized - that the
affect they were capable of producing, prior to classification, re-emerges. From the alchemical perspective,
this is death of the "king" - the previously reigning "system of order" - and re-appearance of the "queen,"
the Great Mother - source of threat and promise, vital for renewal. The immersion of the king in the queen
[their "sexual union" (the incest motif)] means reduction of the "world" to the precosmogonic chaos
329 



preceding creation - to the state of prima materia, primal matter. This also leads to the state of the "warring
opposites" - to the re-emergence of conflicting "substances" held in harmony by the preceding orderly
condition. The "reunion" (symbolized as a creative, or "sexual" union) of king and queen produces a state
characterized by the possibility of something new. This "something new" might be conceptualized as the
"divine son," emerging from that union - soon to be king again. This divine son was regarded, variously, as
the new king - or even as the philosopher's stone itself, in one of its many potential forms. This much more
complex process of conceptualization - which accounts for the vast symbolic production of alchemy - is
presented schematically in Figure 63: The Alchemical Opus as "Revolutionary Story."

Figure 63: The Alchemical Opus as "Revolutionary Story."
3.3.2.4. The Prima Materia
"It offers itself in lowly form. From it there springs our eternal water."614
The prima materia (alternatively: the "round chaos" or the alchemical uroboros) is the unknown as matter
and, simultaneously, as effect upon imagination and behavior (inseparable pre-experimentally): is God as
substance and effect of substance. The prima materia is the "precosmogonic egg," the dragon of chaos -
the eternal source from which spirit and knowledge and matter and world arise. It is the unknown that
330 




simultaneously generates new phenomena, when explored; the unknown that serves as the source of the
"information" that comes to constitute the determinate experiencing subject. The alchemists therefore
granted the prima materia a "half chemical, half mythological" definition: For one alchemist, it was
quicksilver, for others it was ore, iron, gold, lead, salt, sulphur, vinegar, water, air, fire, earth, blood, water
of life, lapis, poison, spirit, cloud, dew, sky, shadow, sea, mother, moon, serpent.... Jung states:
"The autonomy and everlastingness of the prima materia in Paracelsus [for example] suggest a principle
equal to the Deity, corresponding to a dea mater.... The following texts, for example, are applied to the
prima materia: 'and his going forth is from the beginning, from the days of eternity' (Micah 5:2) and
'before Abraham was made, I am' (John 8:58). This is supposed to show that the stone is without
beginning and has its [primary existence] from all eternity, and that it too is without end and will exist in
all eternity....
And in the same way, continues the author, that the stone together with its material has a thousand
names and is therefore called 'miraculous,' all these names can in eminent degree be predicated of God,
and the author thereupon proceeds to this application. A Christian can hardly believe his ears.... 'That
from which things arise is the invisible and immovable God.' "615
The alchemists understood the prima materia to be as of yet "unredeemed," however, and "base." The
notion of corrupted matter was a moral notion, and the "imperfection" of matter therefore a moral
imperfection. The alchemists' reflections on the nature of this imperfect matter inevitably took the form of
reflections upon the moral problem of imperfection and material corruption, as such. Since the alchemist
thought analogically and symbolically, in the absence of the empirical method, he fantasized or imagined
that the corrupt prima materia shared the characteristics of other corrupt and imperfect creations, including
physical man, contaminated by Original Sin and his own transgressions.
It is virtually impossible for us, as moderns, to realize the degree to which the universe of our forebears
was a moral universe. Every aspect of that archaic world was engaged in moral endeavour, participating in
corruption, striving towards perfection. Every ore wanted to be pure metal, every pure metal, gold. All
smiths, miners - and alchemists - were serving therefore serving the role of midwife, striving to help the
Earth bring forth the "perfect" substances it evidently desired to produce. Eliade states, with regards to the
attitude characterizing the primitive metal-worker:
"Mineral substances shared in the sacredness attaching to the Earth-Mother. Very early on we are
confronted with the notion that ores 'grow' in the belly of the earth, after the manner of embryos.
Metallurgy thus takes on the character of obstetrics. Miner and metal-worker intervene in the unfolding
of subterranean embryology: they accelerate the rhythm of the growth of ores, they collaborate in the
work of Nature and assist it to give birth more rapidly. In a word, man, with his various techniques,
gradually takes the place of Time: his labours replace the work of Time.
To collaborate in the work of Nature, to help her to produce at an ever-increasing tempo, to change
the modalities of matter - here, in our view, lies one of the key sources of alchemical ideology. We do
not, of couse, claim that there is an unbroken continuity between the mental world of the alchemist and
that of the miner, metal-worker and smith (although, indeed, the initiation rites and mysteries of the
Chinese smiths form an integral part of the traditions later inherited by Chinese Taoism and alchemy).
But what the smelter, smith and alchemist have in common is that all three lay claim to a particular
magico-religious experience in their relations with matter; this experience is their monopoly, and its
secret is transmitted through the initiatory rites of their trades. All three work on a Matter which they
hold to be at once alive and sacred, and in their labours they pursue the transformation of matter, its
perfection and its transmutation."616
In the unredeemed prima materia the alchemist understood matter to be trapped in an imperfect state;
just as man himself was trapped, in a corrupt and perishable state, by his sinful, demonic physical material
nature. The transformation of this prima materia into gold or into the philosopher's stone therefore
signified a moral transformation, which could be brought about through moral means. The alchemists were
searching for a method to redeem corruption. They applied their fantastical reasoning to redemption of
corrupt matter, which seems absurd from the modern viewpoint. However, experience of the physical world
331 









had been formally damned by the Church - for reasons which had their own logic - and the lost value this
experience represented stood therefore in dire need of redemption. The search for lost value led the
alchemists deep into consideration of the nature of corruption, or limitation, and past that, into its
transformation, and redemption. Their devoted concentration upon the nature of this problem set in motion
fantasies associated with the archetype of the way, which always emerges of its own accord, when
individuals face their limitations and come into contact with the unknown. And - it must be understood:
although the alchemists conflated "the psyche" and "objective reality," their conflation was meaningful.
The alchemist did "redeem" himself, by studying the "redemptive" transformations of matter - most
simply, because exploration "releases" information that can be used to construct personality; more
complexly, because the act of voluntary exploration, outside the domain allowed by tradition, constitutes
identification with the creative hero.
The first alchemical transformation took the form of disintegration: chemical solution or putrefaction of
the prima materia, in its "solid" form - in its patriarchal incarnation, in its manifestation as "ordered" or
"stable" or "rigid" substance. The archetypal first stage in any moral transformation (which the alchemist
was striving to produce) constitutes tragic disruption of the previous state of being. The disintegration of
the prima materia was analogically equivalent to the degeneration of the alchemist's previous sociallydetermined
intrapsychic state, consequential to his decision to pursue the unknown:
"The chemical putrefaction is compared to the study of the philosophers, because as the philosophers are
disposed to knowledge by study, so natural things are disposed by putrefaction to solution. To this is
compared philosophical knowledge...."617
The nature of the previous state of the alchemist, its symbolic equivalent in the prima materia, and the
consequences of its disintegration, can be placed in context by examination of the medieval world-view.
The investigation of matter was absolutely heretical, for medieval homo sapiens. Mere suggestion that
the unknown still existed, and therefore required investigation, threatened the absolute authority of the
Christian dogma, as historically formulated by the fathers of the Church. Questioning this authority meant
that the alchemist placed himself outside the protection of his cultural canon, in the psychological sense,
and at the mercy of the ecclesiastical authorities in the practical world. Investigation of matter and its
transformations was therefore an exceptionally dangerous undertaking, both from the intrapsychic and
social viewpoints. The standard punishment for heretical undertakings was exceedingly horrible -
involving extreme torture and absolute excommunication - and the potential psychic consequences scarcely
less dangerous.
The alchemist, in beginning his pursuit, placed himself outside the protective enclave of conformity, and
risked the investigation of an aspect of experience which, according to the world-view of his time, was
characterized by absolute demonism. The apprehension such an undertaking must have engendered in the
minds of those who adopted it is scarcely imaginable (although such apprehension re-emerges in the mind
of the modern, threatened by revolutionary ideas). The alchemical search of the unknown, for the ideal, had
as its prerequisite or its immediate consequence abandonment or disorganization of the reigning individual
and social world-view. To investigate matter, for the ideal, meant the investigation of evil, and corruption
itself, in the pursuit of value. The alchemist who pursued this investigation already believed he was in need
of redemption, that he was incomplete, or he would have never dared step outside the boundaries drawn by
the church. His need of redemption, of completion, paralleled that of the corrupt prima materia and further
strengthened the "unconscious" analogous identity between the adept and his material.
5.3.2.5. The King of Order
In the absence of formal empirical methodology, the alchemical adept could only investigate the
transformations of matter with the preconceptions of his imagination. The products of alchemy were
therefore necessarily structured according to the myth of the way, the primary archetypal manifestation of
imaginative fantasy. The alchemist worked alone, concentrating on his procedure for months and years at a
time, and in this solitary pursuit, his fantasy had free reign. Once he had the courage to admit to his own
ignorance, his own insufficiency, his investigations into "matter" took the form of contact with the
332 






unknown. Admission of personal ignorance presents a challenge to the cultural canon (to the degree that the
ignorant one is identified with that canon) and sets the stage for moral transformation, which manifests
itself in symbolic form. The alchemist was searching for comprehension of the nature of material
corruption, and for a method whereby it could be perfected. Christian dogma stated that the world had been
finally redeemed by the Passion of Christ; but it appeared evident to the alchemist that material substances,
including himself, remained "morally" corrupt and incomplete. Admission of imperfection was therefore
tantamount to admission that Christian dogma, as presented by the authoritarian Church - and, in
consequence, as represented intrapsychically - was incomplete. This incompleteness, manifested as
absolute authority, served a tyrannical function, which had to be eliminated, prior to the creation of new
knowledge. The aspect of the prima materia, which was first in need of redemption, was therefore its
patriarchal/tyrannical aspect (its "son"), which appeared in imagination as the Great Father - as the King,
or his symbolic equivalent. Jung states:
"The conscious mind often knows little or nothing about its own transformation, and does not want to
know anything. The more autocratic it is, and the more convinced of the eternal validity of its truths, the
more it identifies with them. Thus the kingship of Sol, which is a natural phenomenon, passes to the
human king who personifies the prevailing dominant idea and must therefore share its fate. In the
phenomenal world the Heraclitean law of everlasting change, panta ret, prevails; and it seems that all
the true things must change and that only that which changes remains true...
In this alchemical procedure we can easily recognize the projection of the transformation process: the
aging of a psychic dominant is apparent from the fact that it expresses the psychic totality in an everdiminishing
degree. One can also say that the psyche no longer feels wholly contained in the dominant,
whereupon the dominant loses its fascination and no longer grips the psyche so completely as before. On
the other hand its content and meaning are no longer properly understood, or what is understood fails to
touch the heart. A 'sentiment d'incompletude' of this kind produces a compensatory reaction which
attracts other regions of the psyche and their contents, so as to fill up the gap. As a rule this is an
unconscious process that always sets in when the attitude and orientation of the conscious mind have
proved inadequate. I stress this point because the conscious mind is a bad judge of its own situation and
often persists in the illusion that its attitude is just the right one and is only prevented from working
because of some external annoyance. If the dreams were observed it would soon become clear why the
conscious assumptions have become unworkable. And if, finally, neurotic symptoms appear, then the
attitude of consciousness, its ruling idea, is contradicted, and in the unconscious there is a stirring up of
those archetypes that were the most suppressed by the conscious attitude. The therapist then has no other
course than to confront the ego with its adversary and thus initiate the melting and recasting process.
The confrontation is expressed, in the alchemical myth of the king, as the collision of the masculine,
spiritual father ruled over by king Sol with the feminine, chthonic mother-world symbolized by the aqua
permanens or by the chaos."618
The process represented symbolically as "disintegration of the Kindg" found its analogical material
equivalent in the chemical process of dissolution - in the immersion of a solid substance or compound (the
prima materia) in a solvent, or in its decay, its return to earth (hence the still extant metaphor for the
wastrel: the dissolute personality). The "solid substance," the King, represented the mythic core of the
historically-determined hierarchy of behavioral pattern and representation with which the adept had been
previously identified and which had to be abandoned or challenged, before the investigation of
matter/unknown could begin in earnest. Destruction of the culturally-determined patriarchal system is
typically represented in fantasy, symbolically, as the death of the old (sterile, sick) king, which becomes
necessary when the land is no longer fruitful. Such a sacrifice - which was once a ritual - means rejection
of reliance on a particular pattern of behavioral adaptation and representational presumption; means
potential for re-introduction of new ideas (or even a new pattern of ideas), when adaptation is threatened by
anomaly.619 The idea of the King - the central representative of culture - was expressed in a multitude of
symbolic images during the centuries alchemy flourished. The eagle, the sun, the lion, heaven, fire, height,
and spirit all symbolized different aspects of the patriarchal system, which served to represent the initial
condition of the prima materia, prior to its dissolution. Such symbolic representations emerge as a matter
333 










of course, if the conditions which originally elicited them re-emerge. Encounter with the unknown
constitutes one such condition.
5.3.2.6. The Queen of Chaos
The solvent in which the prima materia as King dissolves, or the earth to which it returns, is imaginatively
represented in the alchemical process by symbols characteristic of the matriarchal system. The prima
materia dissolves in water, salt water, tears, or blood, as the old King dissolves in the matriarchal system -
dissolves in (previously confined) sensuality, affect and imagination, which threaten and transcend
knowledge in its concrete form, and serve simultaneously as the matrix from which it is borne. The
matriarchal system is the intrapsychic representative of the Queen, the Great and Terrible Mother, who is
sea, toad, fish or dragon, lioness, earth, depth, the cross, death and matter:
"... it is the moon, the mother of all things, the vessel, it consists of opposites, has a thousand names, is
an old woman and a whore, as Mater Alchimia it is wisdom and teaches wisdom, it contains the elixir of
life in potentia and is the mother of the Savior and of the filius Macrocosma, it is the earth and the
serpent hidden in the earth, the blackness and the dew and the miraculous water which brings together
all that is divided."620
The prima materia as King dissolves in the prima materia as salt water, or as sea, which represent the
matrix and emotion, as bitter salt water constitutes tears and tragic affect (the consequence of desire's
failure). The heat which promotes chemical solution is the symbolic equivalent of passion, emotion or
sensuality - aspects of the intrapsychic world, outside the domain of rational thought. The dissolution of
the King in the matriarchal system thematically recreates the heroic/sacrificial motif of incest, creative
(sexual) re-union with the mother. This creative reunion manifests itself first of all as psychological chaos,
depression and anxiety, and only then as re-creation. The king is the son of God, in previously incarnated
form, who loses his effectiveness in the course of time. Ritualistic primitive regicide is predicated upon the
belief that the magic power of the king, his ability to renew his subjects and the land, decreases with age.
Subjection to (intrapsychic and/or social) tyranny inevitably promotes stagnation and depression,
dissolution. Nonetheless, challenge presented to the prevailing spirit of the times means the removal of
knowledge from the context within which it has relevance, and the subsequent return of what is
conditionally known to the domain of the terrible and promising unknown:
"In order to enter into God's Kingdom the king must transform himself into the prima materia in the
body of his mother, and return to the dark initial state which the alchemists called the 'chaos.' In this
massa confusa the elements are in conflict and repel one another; all connections are dissolved.
Dissolution is the prerequisite for redemption. The celebrant of the mysteries had to suffer a figurative
death in order to attain transformation."621
The matriarchal "realm," which Jung personified in imagistic representation as the anima, is the source
of new knowledge, as the unknown. This makes the matriarchal realm "mother/wisdom," matrix of the
revelation that renews. Such revelation necessarily threatens the stability of previous knowledge, however,
and "releases" previously "inhibited" affect (in consequence of the dissolution of predictability and
certainty). Jung states:
"The anima becomes creative when the king renews himself in her. Psychologically the king stands first
of all for Sol, whom we have interpreted as consciousness. But over and above that he represents a
dominant of consciousness, such as a generally accepted principle or a collective conviction or a
tradition. These systems and ruling ideas 'age' and thereby forcibly bring about a 'metamorphosis of the
gods'.... [This] seldom occurs as a definite collective phenomenon. Mostly it is a change in the
individual which may, under certain conditions, affect society 'when the time is fulfilled.' In the
individual it only means that the ruling idea is in need of renewal and alteration if it is to deal adequately
with the changed outer or inner conditions."622
334 







The king's original state of sickness is the certain eventual fate of concrete knowledge, posited as
absolute. Since the unknown always transcends the limits of the known, no final statement about the nature
of existence is possible. Attempts to limit knowledge to what is presently known must therefore necessarily
result in eventual social and psychological stagnation. It is an unfortunate fact that attempts to overcome
such stagnation must first result in the production of affective, motivational and ideational chaos.
Dissolution of the patriarchal in the matriarchal system, even in the voluntary pursuit of an ideal,
culminates in the creation of a psychically chaotic state, symbolized in alchemy as the sick-bed of the King,
as the pregnancy of the Queen, or as some analogical equivalent thereof. The chaotic state engendered
consequent to decision to pursue the unknown is accompanied by emergence of various constitutive
psychological factors in fantasy, embodied, personified, as opposing forces, lacking mediating principle.
This is precisely equivalent to an "internal" return to a state of polytheism, where the "gods who rule
humanity" war without subjection to a higher-order "power." The alchemists described this stage of their
opus as the nigredo, or blackness - a condition we would associate with depression, psychological chaos,
uncertainty, impulsivity, and anxiety.
Blackness descends when the motivational significance of events and processes, previously held in
check through adherence to a central, paradigmatically structured set of beliefs, implicit and explicit,
becomes once again indeterminate and novel. The dissolution of their previously held beliefs allowed the
fundamental constituent structures of the alchemists' psyche to become actively personified in fantasy.
Elements of individual, patriarchal, and matriarchal systems vie in competition, lacking uniting principle,
abandoned in the pursuit of the unknown. Jung states:
"This [initial] battle is the separatio, divisio, putrefactio, mortificatio, and solutio, which all represent
the original chaotic state of conflict....623 Dorn describes this vicious, warlike [state] allegorically as the
four-horned serpent, which the devil, after his fall from heaven, sought to "infix" in the mind of man.
Dorn puts the motif of war on a moral plane and thereby approximates it to the modern concept of
psychic dissociation, which, as we know, lies at the root of the psychogenic psychoses and neuroses. In
the 'furnace of the cross' and in the fire, says the 'Aquarium sapientum,' 'man, like the earthly gold,
attains to the true black Raven's head; that is, he is utterly disfigured and is held in derision by the
world, and this not only for forty days and nights, or years, but often for the whole duration of his life;
so much so that he experiences more heartache in his life than comfort and joy, and more sadness than
pleasure.... Through this spiritual death his soul is entirely freed.' Evidently the nigredo brought about a
deformation and a psychic suffering which the author compared to the plight of the unfortunate Job.
Job's unmerited misfortune, visited upon him by God, is the suffering of God's servant and a
prefiguration of Christ's passion."624
Identification with the pre-existent cultural canon - or pretence of such identification -provides protection
against the unknown, and context for knowledge, but promotes tyranny. The final cost of this identification
is the lie - denial of deviance and the unknown. When such identification is abandoned voluntarily or
rendered impossible by circumstantial change, the affects "held in check" by the integrity of the previous
classification system are free once again to manifest themselves. The "dissolution of the king" means that
much of what was previously understood reverts to the unknown. This might be regarded as the reversal of
the historical process that made of all gods one supreme god or, speaking more psychologically, as the war
of conflicting drives, desires and "subpersonalities" that ensues when an overarching hierarchy of values
has collapsed. Such a "reversion" places the individual in a state characterized by great uncertainty,
frustration, depression and turmoil.
5.3.2.7. The Peregrination
The alchemists believed that perfection was characterized by a state of unity, in which all "competing
opposites" were united. The final stage of the alchemical procedure - the conjunction - was therefore
335 




proceded first by recognition and identification of all the diverse "aspects of the psyche" warring in
opposition in the "belly of the uroboric dragon":
"What, then, do the statements of the alchemists concerning their arcanum mean, looked at
psychologically? In order to answer this question we must remember the working hypothesis we have
used for the interpretation of dreams: the images in dreams and spontaneous fantasies are symbols, that
is, the best possible formulation for still unknown or unconscious facts, which generally compensate the
content of consciousness or the conscious attitude. If we apply this basic rule to the alchemical arcanum,
we come to the conclusion that its most conspicuous quality, namely, its unity and uniqueness - one is
the stone, one the medicine, one the vessel, one the procedure, and one the disposition - presupposes a
dissociated consciousness. For no one who is one himself needs oneness as a medicine - nor, we might
add, does anyone who is unconscious of his dissociation, for a conscious situation of distress is needed
in order to activate the archetype of unity. From this we may conclude that the more philosophically
minded alchemists were people who did not feel satisfied with the then prevailing view of the world,
that is, with the Christian faith, although they were convinced of its truth. In this latter respect we find in
the classical Latin and Greek literature of alchemy no evidences to the contrary, but rather, so far as
Christian treatises are concerned, abundant testimony to the firmness of their Christian convictions.
Since Christianity is expressly a system of "salvation," founded moreover on God's "plan of
redemption," and God is unity par excellence, one must ask oneself why the alchemists still felt a
disunity in themselves, or not at one with themselves, when their faith, so it would appear, gave them
every opportunity for unity and unison. (This question has lost nothing of its topicality today, on the
contrary!)."625
This global recognition was conceptualized, variously, as a "journey to the four corners of the earth" -
the peregrination - or as familiarization with every aspect of being, as a vast expansion of self-knowledge.
The incorporation of all competing states of motivation into a single hierarchy of value presupposes
recognition of all diverse (painful, uncomfortable, difficult to manage) desires, and the "forging" of an
agreement between them. This can be most accurately viewed as a potentially "redemptive" expansion of
self-consciousness. It might be said: emergence of the limited self-consciousness symbolically represented
in myths of the Fall constituted grounds for the descent of man. The alchemical philosophers - meditating
endlessly on the nature of perfection, or the transformative processes necessary for the production of
perfection - came to "realize" that increased self-consciousness might constitute recompense for expulsion
from Paradise. But identification of all competing desires meant clear-headed recognition of the truly tragic
situation of man, and of all the "sinful" and mortal weaknesses, sins and insufficiencies associated with
individual being - and then the attempt to come to real terms with that situation, and those limitations.
If you are a miserable and disorganized fool, producing chaos wherever you go, it is tremendously
painful to recognize yourself - and to see the enormity of the job ahead of you. It is very difficult to replace
delusional identification with the persona with clear-headed apprehension of the real (and insufficient)
individual personality. This clearer vision or conception is something attained at no small cost (and this
says nothing about the cost of transforming that conception into action). The "savage, wild animal" - the
"hungry robber, the wolf, lion, and other ravening beasts"626 served as apt representative of the
"unredeemed individual," from the alchemical perspective. Emergence and recognition of this animal is
necessary precondition to his transformation. This idea is represented imagistically in Figure 64: The Wolf
as prima materia, Devouring the Dead King.
627 This "devouring of the Dead King" by the now-recognized
"beast of the underworld" is very much akin to Solzhenitsyn's discovery of his personal responsibility for
the Gulag that imprisoned him. For a typical modern, an equal shock might be produced by his discovery of
identity with the Nazi. The barbarians of Hitler's state were normal men - normal men, like you (and me).
This cannot be emphasized strongly enough. But the "normal man" does not conceptualize himself as Nazi.
This means, merely, that his self-concept provides him with illusory security (as a prison protects its
inmates from the outside). But the Nazi actions - that is, the willful torture of innocents, and enjoyment of
such - is well within the normal man's range of capacities (and does not likely exhaust them). The
individual is a terrible force for evil. Recognition of that force - real recognition, the kind that comes as a
staggering blow - is a precondition for any profound improvement in character. By such improvement, I
336 

mean - the capacity to bear the tragedy of existence, to transcend that tragedy - and not to degenerate
instead into something "unconsciously" desirous of disseminating pain and misery. Jung states:
Figure 64: The Wolf as prima materia, Devouring the Dead King
"It is worth noting that the animal is the symbolic carrier of the self [the psychic totality]. This hint in
Maier is borne out by modern individuals who have no notion of alchemy. It expresses the fact that the
structure of wholeness was always present but was buried in profound unconsciousness, where it can
always be found again if one is willing to risk one's skin to attain the greatest possible range of
consciousness through the greatest possible self-knowledge - a 'harsh and bitter drink' usually reserved
for hell. The throne of God seems to be no unworthy reward for such trials. For self-knowledge - in the
total meaning of the word - is not a one-sided intellectual pastime but a journey through the four
continents, where one is exposed to all the dangers of land, sea, air and fire. Any total act of recognition
worthy of the name embraces the four - or 360! - aspects of existence. Nothing may be 'disregarded.'
When Ignatius Loyalus recommended 'imagination through the five senses' to the meditant, and told
him to imitate Christ 'by use of his senses,' what he had in mind was the fullest possible 'realization' of
the object of contemplation. Quite apart from the moral or other effects of this kind of meditation, its
chief effect is the training of consciousness, of the capacity for concentration, and of attention and
clarity of thought. The corresponding forms of Yoga have similar effects. But in contrast to these
337 






traditional modes of realization, where the meditant projects himself into some prescribed form, the selfknowledge
alluded to by Maier is a projection into the empirical self as it actually is. It is not the 'self'
we like to imagine ourselves to be after carefully removing all the blemishes, but the empirical ego just
as it is, with everything that it does and everything that happens to it. Everybody would like to be quit of
this odious adjunct, which is precisely why in the East the ego is explained as illusion and why in the
West it is offered up in sacrifice to the Christ figure.
By contrast, the aim of the mystical peregrination is to understand all parts of the world, to achieve
the greatest possible extension of consciousness, as though its guiding principle were the Carpocratic
idea that one is delivered from no sin which one has not committed. Not a turning away from its
empirical 'so-ness,' but the fullest possible experience of the ego as reflected in the 'ten thousand
things' - that is the goal of the peregrination."628
The mask each person wears in society is based upon the pretence that the individual is identical with
his culture (usually, with the "best elements" of that culture). The fool, hiding behind the mask, is
composed of individual deviance, which is deceitfully avoided, lied about, out of fear. This deviant, unlived
life contains the worst and the best tendencies of the individual, suppressed by cultural opinion because
they threaten the norm; forced underground by the individual himself, because they threaten personal shortterm
psychological stability (which means group identification and ongoing inhibition of fear. In the
absence of an integrated hierarchical moral (patriarchal) system, competing values and viewpoints tend
towards disintegration, as each pursues its own end - as greed might make the pursuit of lust difficult, as
hunger might render love impossible. When a moral system undergoes dissolution, and loses its absolute
validity - its higher moral structure - the values which it held in union revert to incompatability, at least
from the conscious viewpoint. This war of conflicting values - of which each is in itself a necessary "divine
force" - engenders confusion, disorientation, and despair. Such despair - which can be truly unbearable -
might be considered the first pitfall of moral transformation. Mere contemplation of the possibility of such
a state usually engenders sufficient discomfort to bring further moral development to a halt. The alchemist,
however, implicitly adopted a heroic role, when he voluntarily determined to pursue the unknown, in
search of the ideal. His unconscious identification with this eternal image, his active incarnation of the
mythological role, enabled him to persevere in his quest, in the face of grave difficulty. Jung states:
"Only the living presence of the eternal images can lend the human psyche a dignity which makes it
morally possible for a man to stand by his own soul, and be convinced that it is worth his while to
persevere with it. Only then will he realize that the conflict is in him, that the discord and tribulation are
his riches, which should not be squandered by attacking others; and that, if fate should exact a debt from
him in the form of guilt, it is a debt to himself. Then he will recognize the worth of his psyche, for
nobody can owe a debt to a mere nothing. But when he loses his own values he becomes a hungry
robber, the wolf, lion, and other ravening beasts which for the alchemists symbolized the appetites that
break loose when the black waters of chaos - i.e., the unconsciousness of projection - have swallowed
up the king."629
The unknown is contaminated with the psychoanalytic "unconscious," so to speak, because everything
we do not know about ourselves, and everything we have experienced, but not processed (which means
have assimilated, but not accomodated to), has the same affective status as everything that exists merely as
potential. Every thought and impulse we avoid or suppress, because it threatens our self-conception or
notion of the world; every fantasy we experience, but do not admit to (which means, do not adjust our
behaviors in consequence of or representations to account for) exists in the same domain as chaos, the
mother of all things, and serves to undermine our faith in our most vital presumptions. The encounter with
the "unknown," therefore, is simultaneously encounter with those aspects of our selves - our behavior, our
episodic experience, and our verbal - we heretofore defined as impossible (despite their indisputable
"existence"). This integration means making behavioral potentialities previously disregarded available for
conscious use; means (re)construction of a self-model that accurately represents such potential.
Experiences which are currently deemed taboo - which are forbidden, from the perspective of the
currently extant moral schema - may therefore contain within them seeds of creative solution to problems
which currently remain unsolved, or which may arise in the future; may yet constitute "unmined" and
338 


redemptive possibility. Tales of the "travelling sage," "wandering magician" or "courageous adventurer"
constitute recognition of the utility of such potential. From the perspective of such narratives, a "totality of
experience and action" comprises the necessary precondition for the attainment of wisdom. This "total
immersion in life" is the mystical "peregrination" of the medieval alchemist, in search of the philosopher's
stone - is the journey of Buddha through the complete sensory, erotic, and philosophical realms, prior to
his attainment of enlightenment. The ritual of pilgrimage - the "journey to the holy city" - constitutes halfritual,
half-dramatic enactment of this idea. The pilgrim voluntarily places him or herself outside the
"protective walls" of original culture and, through the difficult and demanding (actual) journey to
"unknown but holy lands," catalyzes a psychological process of broadening, integration and maturation. It
is in this manner, that a true "quest" inevitably fulfills itself, even though its "final, impossible goal" (the
holy grail, for example) may remain concretely unattained.
The necessity for experience as the precondition for wisdom may appear self-evident, once due
consideration has been applied to the problem (since wisdom is obviously "derived" from experience) - but
the crux of the matter is that those elements of experience that foster denial or avoidance (and therefore
remain unencountered or unprocessed) always border on the maddening. This is particularly true from the
psychological, rather than ritual, perspective. The "holy pilgrimage" in its abstract or "spiritual" version is
the journey through "elements" of experience and personal character that constitute the subjective "world
of experience" (rather than the shared social and natural world). The "inner world" is divided into familiar
and unknown territory, much as the outer. The "psychological" purpose of the rite-of-passage adventure
(and the reason for the popularity of such journeys, in actuality and in drama) is the development of
character, in consequence of confrontation with the unknown. A "journey to the place that is most feared,"
however, can be undertaken psychologically much as concretely. What such a journey means, however, is a
"peregrination" through the rejected, hated and violently suppressed aspects of personal experience. This is
most literally a voyage to the land of the enemy - to the heart of darkness.
When experience calls the absolute validity of a given belief system into question, the validity of the
definitions of immorality - and of enmity - contained with that system also become questionable:
"For one may doubt, first, whether there are any opposites at all, and secondly whether these popular
valuations and opposite values on which the metaphysicians put their seal, are not perhaps merely
foreground estimates, only provisional perspectives, perhaps even from some nook, perhaps from below,
frog perspectives, as it were, to borrow an expression painters use. For all the value that the true, the
truthful, the selfless may deserve, it would still be possible that a higher and more fundamental value for
life might have to be ascribed to deception, selfishness and lust. It might even be possible that what
constitutes the value of these good and revered things is precisely that they are insidiously related, tied
to, and involved with these wicked, seemingly opposite things - maybe even one with them in
essence."630
Recognition of potential in the transformation of the prima materia meant re-encounter with personal
experience formerly suppressed by cultural pressure and personal decision. Such experience might have
included hatred, cruelty, physical passion, greed, cowardice, confusion, doubt, flight of imagination,
freedom of thought, and personal talent. Things we avoid or deny are precisely those things that transcend
our individual competence, as presently construed - the things or situations that define our limitations, and
that represent inferiority, failure, decomposition, weakness and death. This means that everything despised
and feared, every object of hatred and contempt, everything signifying cowardice, ruthlessness, ignorance -
every experience that cries out for denial may yet constitute information, necessary for life. Jung states:
"In general, the alchemists strove for a total union of opposites in symbolic form, and this they regarded
as the indispensable condition for the healing of all ills. Hence they sought to find ways and means to
produce that substance in which all opposites were united."631
Alchemy speaks of "the union of soul-sparks, to produce the gold." These sparks - scintillae - are "the
light in the darkness," the consciousness associated with poorly integrated or even hostile elements of
individual personality. 632 The germ or seed of unity may manifest itself symbolically at any time in the
procedure, and comes to dominate later if procedure is successful. This centre - Jung's "self"633 - unites the
339 

disparate elements (the "compulsion of the stars") into one, in the course of a circular, cyclical journey (in
the course of the revolutionary spiral path of the way). This emergent centre was regarded by the
alchemists as the spirit Mercurius (the trickster, who was "embedded" in matter), or as the mythical
"pelican," who fed her offspring with her own body and blood, and was therefore an allegory both of Christ
and the (self-nourishing) uroboros. The centre was also regarded as the philosophical stone (the solitaire)
"rejected by the builders," directly identified with Christ (and as the rock upon which security itself might
be founded). This stone, this immovable and indestructible center, "incorporated" the patriarchal and
matriarchal principles (the King and the Queen), and was also regarded as the "offspring" of chaos,
fertilized by order. The emergence of the lapis/Christ/pelican from the domain of the dragon of chaos is
represented in Figure 65: Dragon of Chaos as "Birthplace" of Christ and the Lapis.
634
Figure 65: Dragon of Chaos as "Birthplace" of Christ and the Lapis

340 
The mythological hero faces the unknown, voluntarily, cuts it up, and makes the world out of its pieces;
identifies and overcomes evil, and rescues the ancestral father, languishing in the underworld; unites,
consciously, with the virgin mother, and produces the divine child; and mediates between opposing and
warlike kings. He is, therefore, explorer, creator, lover and peacemaker. The hero is also he who has
travelled everywhere - he who has "mastered strange territory" (even that inhabited by his enemy). This
"travelling everywhere" and "mastering of strange territory" has a psychological significance, and a social
meaning: the divine hero knows and understands the "ways of the enemy" and can use those ways to
advantage.
5.3.2.8. The Conjunction
The process of complete recognition, symbolized or dramatized as the peregrination, sets the stage for
activation of the final alchemical sequence, which consisted of the (hypothetical) union of all now-manifest
"things." Jung outlines the "Arisleus vision," in his text Psychology and Alchemy. This vision contains all
the elements of the alchemical "theory," portrayed in episodic/narrative form. Its sequential analysis helps
shed dramatic light on the nature of the "conjunction":
"Arisleus (a Byzantine alchemist of the 8th or 9th century) tells of his adventures with the Rex Marinus,
in whose kingdom nothing prospers and nothing is begotten. Moreover, there are no philosophers there.
Only like mates with like, consequently there is no procreation. The king must seek the counsel of the
philosophers and mate Thabritius with Beya, his two children whom he has hatched in his brain."635
Jung comments:
 "Thabritius is the masculine, spiritual principle of light and Logos which, like the Gnostic Nous, sinks
into the embrace of physical nature."636
elaborating on an idea he had presented earlier:
"Nous seems to be identical with the God Anthropos: he appears alongside the demiurge and is the
adversary of the planetary spheres. He rends the circle of the spheres and leans down to earth and water
(i.e., is about to project himself into the elements). His shadow falls upon the earth, but his image is
reflected in the water. This kindles the love of the elements, and he himself is so charmed with the
reflected image of divine beauty that he would fain take up his abode within it. But scarcely has he set
foot upon the earth when Physis locks him in a passionate embrace."637
It is important to understand this commentary, as well, to completely appreciate the nature of the prima
materia. The prima materia - Physis - contains spirit, the masculine principle, as well as matter, the
feminine (Beya, in this narrative). The prima materia - dragon of chaos - serves simultaneously as the
source of things, the subject to whom things appear, and the representations of the things characteristic of
that subject. This is not a mere material "source"; it is the absolute unknown itself, in whose embrace spirit
"sleeps," until it is released (in the course of the exploration that transforms the self, as well as producing
something "real" that is new). Jung continues, with an idea that we are now familiar with:
"When we are told that the King is... inanimate, or that his land is unfruitful, it is equivalent to saying
that the hidden state is one of latency and potentiality. The darkness and depths of the sea [which stands
for the unknown] symbolize the unconscious state of an invisible content that is projected. Inasmuch as
such a content belongs to the total personality, and is only apparently severed from its context by
projection, there is always an attraction between conscious mind and projected content. Generally it
takes the form of a fascination. This, in the alchemical allegory, is expressed by the King's cry for help
from the depths of his unconscious, dissociated state. The conscious mind should respond to this call:
one should... render service to the King, for this would be not only wisdom, but salvation as well.
341 

Yet this brings with it the necessity of a descent into the dark world of the unconscious ["the
unknown"]... the perilous adventure of the night sea journey, whose end and aim is the restoration of
life, resurrection, and the triumph over death."638
Despite the risk, Arisleus and his imaginary "companions" brave the quest into the kingdom of the
submerged king. This quest ends terribly, with the death of Thabritius. This death echoes that of Osiris, and
symbolizes the completion of the spirit's descent into "matter" or the unconscious or the unknown (where it
then lies "implicit" or "unrevealed," and "calls for rescue," offering riches to its redeemer). Jung continues
with the story:
"... the death of the King's son is naturally a delicate and dangerous matter. By descending into the
unconscious, the conscious mind puts itself in a perilous position, for it is apparently extinguishing
itself. It is in the situation of the primitive hero who is devoured by the dragon.
... the deliberate and indeed wanton provocation of this state is a sacrilege or breach of taboo attended
by the severest punishments. Accordingly, the King imprisons Arisleus and his companions in a triple
glass house together with the corpse of the King's son. The heroes are held captive in the underworld at
the bottom of the sea, where, exposed to every kind of terror, they languish for eighty days in an intense
heat. At the request of Arisleus, Beya is imprisoned with them. [The Rosarium version of the "Visio"
interprets the prison as Beya's womb].
Clearly, they have been overpowered by the unconscious ["the unknown"] and are helplessly
abandoned, which means that they have volunteered to die in order to beget a new and fruitful life in
that region of the psyche which has hitherto lain fallow in darkest unconsciousness, and under the
shadow of death."639
The "purpose" of the story, in describing this descent, is demonstration that "only in the region of danger
(watery abyss, cavern, forest, island, castle, etc.) can one find the 'treasure hard to attain' (jewel, virgin,
life-potion, victory over death)."640 Jung ends his commentary:
"The dread and resistance which every natural human being experiences when it comes to delving too
deeply into himself is, at bottom, the fear of the journey to Hades. If it were only resistance that he felt,
it would not be so bad. In actual fact, however, the psychic substratum, that dark realm of the unknown,
exercises a fascinating attraction that threatens to become the more overpowering the further he
penetrates into it. The psychological danger that arises here is the disintegration of personality into its
functional components, i.e., the separate functions of consciousness, the complexes, hereditary units,
etc. Disintegration - which may be functional or occasionally a real schizophrenia - is the fate which
overtakes Gabricus (in the Rosarium version): he is dissolved into atoms in the body of Beya.... So long
as consciousness refrains from acting, the opposites will remain dormant in the unconscious. Once they
have been activated, the regius filius - spirit, Logos, Nous - is swallowed up by Physis.... In the hero
myth this state is known as being swallowed up in the belly of the whale or dragon.
The heat there is usually so intense [a consequence of the war of affects; anxiety, anger] that the hero
loses his hair, and is reborn as bald as a babe.... The philosopher makes the journey to hell as a
'redeemer.'"641
The story continues:
"Earlier on, we left Arisleus and his companions, together with Beya and the dead Thabritius, in the
triple glass house where they had been imprisoned by the Rex Marinus. They suffer from the intense
heat, like the three whom Nebuchadnezzar cast into the fiery furnace. King Nebuchadnezzar had a
vision of a fourth, "like the son of God," as we are told in Daniel 3:25.
This vision is not without bearing on alchemy, since there are numerous passages in the literature
stating that the stone is trinus et unus. It consists of the four elements, with fire representing the spirit
concealed in matter. This is the fourth, absent and yet present, who always appears in the fiery agony of
the furnace and symbolizes the divine presence - succour and the completion of the work.
342 







And, in their hour of need, Arisleus and his companions see their master Pythagoras in a dream and
beg him for help. He sends them his disciple Harforetus, the "author of nourishment." So the work is
completed and Thabritius comes to life again. We may suppose that Harforetus brought them the
miraculous food [akin to the host], though this only becomes clear through a discovery of Ruska's, who
gave us access to the text of the Codex Berolinensis. There, in an introduction that is missing from the
printed versions of the "Visio," we read: "Pythagoras says, 'Ye write and have written down for
posterity how this most precious tree is planted, and how he that eats of its fruits shall hunger no
more.'"642
The alchemical opus meant, at one level of analysis, the complete integration of "unknown" and
"known," insofar as that could be attained - but more profoundly, participation in the process that made
"one thing" of unknown and known. This construct and act of construction typically had twin "final" aims,
insofar as it constituted the pursuit of perfection: First: union of the feminine, maternal background of the
"unknown 'material' world," seething with danger, passion and sensuality, into harmony with the ordering
principle of the spirit. [This was represented symbolically as dissolution of the dead "king" and his
subsequent regeneration, after "eating" the miraculous "food" (which is the beneficial aspect of the
unknown, and the hero, simultaneously)]. Subsequently: re-introduction of that integrated psychic
structure to the physical body - the conscious "incarnation" of the now-more-complete spirit, so to speak.
So this meant that the union attained by the (re)incorporation of the 'material unknown" was not complete,
if it was still a matter of philosophy or abstract conceptualization: the well-integrated spirit also had to be
realized in behavior. And this was not necessarily yet even the final stage. The alchemist Dorn states:
"We conclude that meditative philosophy consists in the overcoming of the body by mental union (unio
mentalis). This first union does not as yet make the wise man, but only the mental disciple of wisdom.
The second union of the mind with the body shows forth the wise man, hoping for and expecting that
blessed third union with the first unity [Jung's note: the unus mundus, the latent unity of the world].
May Almighty God grant that all men be made such, and may He be one in All."643
Dorn's ideas refer to a conjunction conceptualized as a three-stage process. The first stage was "union of
the mind" (the "overcoming the body by mental union). This stage refers to the integration of "states of
motivation" (drives, emotions) into a single hierarchy, dominated by the figure of the exploratory hero. The
second stage was (re)union of the united mind with the body. This was equivalent to the second stage of the
hero's journey. After the treasure is released, consequential to the battle with the dragon, the purely
personal aspect of the hero's journey is completed. After all, he has found the "treasure hard to attain." But
the second stage of the hero's journey is return to the community. This is equivalent to Buddha's
determination to retire from the state of Nirvana, until all who were living could make their home there; is
tantamount to the Buddha's belief that the redemption of the one was impossible, in the presence of the
unredeemed many. The reunion of the united mind with the body is inculcation of proper attitude in action
(and is, therefore, the effect of the hero on the world).
The third stage is particularly difficult to comprehend. Re-consideration of the theme of the "tailor who
mends"644 - and who can therefore sew up the hole in the sky, made by the dying king - might help with
initial comprehension. Things that are wrong must be set right. This is a psychological process, even if it
undertaken purely as a consequence of actions conducted "in the outside world." The union of the united
spirit/body with the world means recognition of the essential equivalence of all experience, or consideration
of all aspects of experience as literally equivalent to the self. We presume the existence of an final barrier
between "subject" and "object," but a standpoint exists that gives to all aspects of individual experience -
whether "subjective" or "objective" - equal status, as aspects of experience. Redeeming any aspect of that
experience, then - whether "material" or "psychological"; whether "self" or "other" is then regarded as the
same act - as the act whose purpose is establishment of the "kingdom of god" (which is simultaneously
psychological and social state). "Spiritual work" may therefore be regarded as indistinguishable from
"work on the external circumstances of existence": fix yourself, fix the world. Or, alternatively: the attempt
to bring about the perfection of the external world may be regarded as equivalent to attempt to perfect
oneself. After all, dedication to an ideal necessitates development of self-discipline. This is voluntary
343 



apprenticeship. The world and the self are not different places, from this perspective: "all is experience."
The attempt to redeem one necessarily brings about redemption in the other.
All three of these conjunctions may be represented symbolically by the syzygy - which is the "divine
union of opposites," most generally considered as male and female:
1. first, known (previous knowledge - subsumed under patriarchal/spiritual category) + unknown

(anomaly - subsumed under matriarchal/affective/material/physical category) = united spirit;
2. then "united spirit" (in this context, subsumed into the patriarchal/spiritual category) + "body"
(subsumed under matriarchal/material category) = united spirit/body;
3. then "united spirit/body" (in this context, subsumed under the patriarchal/spiritual category) +
"world" (matriarchal/material/category) = united spirit/body/world.
All three of these unions can be considered variants of the "incest motif," (brother/sister, son/mother,
King/Queen pairings). Stage one, the "mental union," was construed as necessary, valuable, but
incomplete: the attainment of an ordered subjective state (stage two) was another important step along the
way:
"Learn therefore, O Mind, to practise sympathetic love in regard to thine own body, by restraining its
vain appetites, that it may be apt with thee in all things. To this end I shall labour, that it may drink with
thee from the fountain of strength and, when the two are made one, that ye find peace in their union.
Draw nigh, O Body, to this fountain, that with thy Mind thou mayest drink to satiety and hereafter thirst
no more after vanities. O wondrous efficacy of this fount, which maketh one of two, and peace between
enemies! The fount of love can make mind out of spirit and soul, but this maketh one man out of mind
and body."645
The third step, however, was critical: philosophical knowledge and ordered intrapsychic structure - even
when embodied - was regarded as insufficient. That embodied union must be extended to all the world -
regarded as "an aspect of experience" and, therefore, as equivalent (even identical) to the self.
The alchemical procedure was based on the attempt to redeem "matter," to transform it into an ideal.
This procedure operated on the assumption that matter was originally corrupted - like man, in the story of
Genesis. The study of the transformations of corruption and limitation activated a mythological sequence in
the mind of the alchemist. This sequence followed the pattern of the way, upon which all religions have
developed. Formal Christianity adopted the position that the sacrifice of Christ brought history to a close,
and that "belief" in that sacrifice guaranteed redemption. Alchemy rejected that position, in its pursuit of
what remained unknown. In that (heroic) pursuit the alchemist found himself transformed:
"Whereas the Christian belief is that man is freed from sin by the redemptory act of Christ, the alchemist
was evidently of the opinion that the "restitution to the likeness of original and incorrupt nature" had
still to be accomplished by the art, and this can only mean that Christ's work of redemption was
regarded as incomplete. In view of the wickedness which the "Prince of this world," undeterred, goes on
perpetrating as liberally as before, one cannot withhold all sympathy from such an opinion. For an
alchemist who professed allegiance to the Ecclesia spiritualis it was naturally of supreme importance to
make himself an "unspotted vessel" of the Paraclete and thus to realize the idea "Christ" on a plane far
transcending a mere imitation of him...."646
This "realization of Christ on a plane transcending imitation" is an overwhelming idea. It makes of
religious "belief" something far more than belief - something far more terrifying, and far more promising.
The sequence of the alchemical transformation paralleled Christ's passion, paralleled the myth of the hero
and his redemption. The essential message of alchemy is that individual rejection of tyranny, voluntary
pursuit of the unknown and terrifying - predicated upon faith in the ideal - may engender a individual
transformation so overwhelming that its equivalent can only be found in the most profound of religious
myths:
"The Son of the great World who is Theocosmos, i.e., a divine power and world (but whom even today,
unfortunately, many who teach nature in a pagan spirit and many builders of medical science reject in
344 




the high university schools), is the exemplar of the stone which is Theanthropos, i.e., God and man
(whom, as Scripture tells us, the builders of the Church have also rejected); and from the same, in and
from the Great World Book of Nature, [there issues] a continuous and everlasting doctrine for the wise
and their children: indeed, it is a splendid living likeness of our Savior Jesus Christ, in and from the
Great World which by nature is very similar to him (as to miraculous conception, birth, inexpressible
powers, virtues, and effects); so God our Lord, besides his Son's Biblical histories, has also created a
specific image and natural representation for us in the Book of Nature."647
It was in pursuit of the unknown that the alchemist experienced this psychological transformation, just
as it was originally in contact with the unknown that the (monotheistic) patriarchal system developed, in the
furthest reaches of history. It is the symbolic expression of the action of instinct, which manifests itself in
some variant of the hero myth, whenever the unknown is pursued, without avoidance, in the attempt to
improve life. The alchemist experienced what the individual always experiences, when he determines to
face every aspect of his existence (individual and collective), without denial or recourse to sterile
preconceptions.
"The passion that vibrates in [the alchemical texts] is genuine, but would be totally incomprehensible if
the lapis were nothing but a chemical substance. Nor does it originate in contemplation of Christ's
Passion; it is the real experience of a man who has got involved in the compensatory contents of the
unconscious by investigating the unknown, seriously and to the point of self-sacrifice. He could not but
see the likeness of his projected contents to the dogmatic images [which were in fact likely utilized by
the instinctual procedure], and he might have been tempted to assume that his ideas were nothing else
than the familiar religious conceptions, which he was using in order to explain the chemical procedure.
But the texts show clearly that, on the contrary, a real experience of the opus had an increasing tendency
to assimilate the dogma or to amplify itself with it."648
In Christianity, spirit descends to matter, and the result of the union is the birth of Christ (and,
unfortunately, the formal realization of his opponent). In alchemy, which compensated for the one-sided
view of Christianity, matter rises to spirit, with analogous result: creation of the lapis or philosophical
stone, which bears an unmistakable resemblance to Christ, embodied in abstractly material form. This
form, the philosopher's stone, the lapis, was composed of the most paradoxical elements: it was base,
cheap, immature and volatile; perfect, precious, ancient and solid; visible to all yet mysterious; costly, dark,
hidden and evident, having one name and many names. The lapis was also the renewed King, the wise old
man, and the child. The wise old man posesses the charisma of wisdom, which is the knowledge that
transcends the limits of history. The child represents the creative spirit, the possibility in man, the Holy
Ghost. He is not the child of ignorance, but the innocence of maturity. He precedes and antedates history in
the subjective and collective sense:
"The "child" is all that is abandoned and exposed and at the same time divinely powerful; the
insignificant, dubious beginning, and the triumphal end. The "eternal child" in man is an indescribable
experience, an incongruity, a handicap, and a divine prerogative; an imponderable that determines the
ultimate worth or worthlessness of a personality."649
This final value, the goal of the pursuit of the alchemists, is discovery and embodiment of the meaning of
life itself: integrated subjective being actively expressing its nature through manipulation of the
possibilities inherent in the material/unknown world. This final goal is the production of an integrated
intrapsychic condition - identical to that of the mythological hero - "acted out" in a world regarded as
equivalent to the self. Production of this condition - the lapis philosophorum - constitutes the "antidote"
for the "corruption of the world," attendant upon the Fall [attendant upon the emergence of (partial) selfconsciousness].
The lapis is "agent of transformation," equivalent to the mythological redemptive hero -
able to to turn "base metals into gold." It is, as such, something more valuable than gold - just as the hero
is more valuable than any of his concrete productions. The "complete" alchemical opus - with production
of the lapis as goal - is presented schematically in Figure 66: The Alchemical Opus as Myth of
Redemption.

Figure 66: The Alchemical Opus as Myth of Redemption.
Alchemy was a living myth: the myth of the individual man, as redeemer. Organized Christianity had
"sterilized itself," so to speak, by insisting on the worship of something external as the means to salvation.
The alchemists (re)discovered the error of this presumption, and came to realize that identification with the
redeemer was in fact necessary, not his "worship" - came to realize that that myths of redemption had true
power when they were "incorporated," and acted out, rather than "believed," in some abstract sense. This
meant: to say that Christ was "the greatest man in history" - a combination of the divine and mortal - was
not sufficient "expression of faith." Sufficient expression meant, alternatively, the attempt to live out the
myth of the hero within the confines of individual personality - to voluntarily shoulder the cross of
existence, to "unite the opposites" within a single breast, and to serve as active conscious mediator between
the eternal generative forces of known and unknown.
5.4. Conclusion: The Divinity of Interest
Anomalies manifest themselves on the border between chaos and order, so to speak, and have a threatening
and promising aspect. The promising aspect dominates, when the contact is voluntary, when the exploring
agent is up-to-date - when the individual has explored all previous anomalies, released the "information"
they contained, and built a strong personality and steady "world" from that information. The threatening
aspect dominates, when the contact is involuntary, when the exploring agent is not up-to-date - when the
individual has run away from evidence of his previous errors, failed to extract the information "lurking
behind" his mistakes, weakened his personality, and destabilized his "world."
The phenomenon of interest - that precursor to exploratory behavior - signals the presence of a
potentially "beneficial" anomaly. Interest manifests itself where an assimilable but novel phenomenon
346 


exists: where something new "hides," in a partially comprehensible form. Devout adherence to the dictates
of interest - assuming a suitably disciplined character - therefore insures stabilization and renewal of
personality and world.
Interest is a spirit beckoning from the unknown - a spirit calling from outside the "walls" of society.
Pursuit of individual interest means hearkening to this spirit's call - means journeying outside the
protective walls of childhood dependence and adolescent group identification; means also return to tp and
rejuvenation of society. This means that pursuit of individual interest - development of true individuality -
is equivalent to identification with the hero. Such identification renders the world bearable, despite its
tragedies - and reduces unnecessary suffering, which most effectively destroys, to an absolute minimum.
This is the message that everyone wants to hear. Risk your security. Face the unknown. Quit lying to
yourself, and do what your heart truly tells you to do. You will be better for it, and so will the world.
5.4.1. Introduction
"Where does one not encounter that veiled glance which burdens one with a profound sadness, that
inward-turned glance of the born failure which betrays how such a man speaks to himself - that glance
which is a sigh! 'If only I were someone else,' sighs this glance: 'but there is no hope of that. I am who I
am: how could I ever get free of myself? And yet - I am sick of myself!'
 It is on such soil, on swampy ground, that every weed, every poisonous plant grows, always so small, so
hidden, so false, so saccharine. Here the worms of vengefulness and rancor swarm; here the air stinks of
secrets and concealment; here the web of the most malicious of all conspiracies is being spun constantly -
the conspiracy of the suffering against the well-constituted and victorious, here the aspect of the victorious
is hated. And what mendaciousness is employed to disguise that this hatred is hatred! What a display of
grand words and postures, what an art of 'honest' calumny! These failures: what noble eloquence flows
from their lips! How much sugary, slimy, humble submissiveness swims in their eyes! What do they really
want? At least to represent justice, love, wisdom, superiority - that is the ambition of the 'lowest,' the sick.
And how skillful such an ambition makes them! Admire above all the forger's skill with which the stamp of
virtue, even the ring, the golden-sounding ring of virtue, is here counterfeited. They monopolize virtue,
these weak, hopelessly sick people, there is no doubt of it: 'we alone are the good and just,' they say, 'we
alone are homines bonae voluntatis.' They walk among us as embodied reproaches, as warnings to us - as
if health, well-constitutedness, strength, pride and sense of power were in themselves necessarily vicious
things for which one must pay some day, and pay bitterly: how ready they themselves are at bottom to
make one pay; how they crave to be hangmen."650
I was reading Jeffrey Burton Russell's Mephistopheles: The Devil in the Modern World,
651 when I came
across his discussion of Dostoevsky's The Brothers Karamazov. Russell discusses Ivan's argument for
atheism - which is one of the most powerful ever mounted:
"Ivan's examples of evil, all taken from the daily newspapers of 1876, are unforgettable: the nobleman
who orders his hounds to tear the peasant boy to pieces in front of his mother; the man who whips his
struggling horse 'on its gentle eyes'; the parents who lock their tiny daughter all night in the freezing
privy while she knocks on the walls pleading for mercy; the Turk who entertains a baby with a shiny
pistol before blowing its brains out. Ivan knows that such horrors occur daily and can be multiplied
without end. 'I took the case of children,' Ivan explains, 'to make my case clearer. Of the other tears
with which the earth is soaked, I will say nothing.'"652
Russell states:
"The relation of evil to God has in the century of Auschwitz and Hiroshima once again become a center
of philosophical and theological discussion. The problem of evil can be stated simply: God is
omnipotent; God is perfectly good; such a God would not permit evil to exist; but we observe that evil
347 










exists; therefore God does not exist. Variations on this theme are nearly infinite. The problem is not only
abstract and philosophical, of course; it is also personal and immediate. Believers tend to forget that
their God takes away everything that one cares about: possessions, comforts, success, profession or
craft, knowledge, friends, family and life. What kind of God is this? Any decent religion must face this
question squarely, and no answer is credible that cannot be given in the face of dying children."653
It seems to me that we use the horrors of the world to justify our own inadequacies. We make the
presumption that human vulnerability is a sufficient cause of human cruelty. We blame God, and God's
creation, for twisting and perverting our souls, and claim, all the time, to be innocent victims of
circumstance. What do you say to a dying child? You say, "you can do it; there is something in you that is
strong enough to do it." And you don't use the terrible vulnerability of children as an excuse for the
rejection of existence, and the perpetration of conscious evil.
I do not have much experience as a clinical psychologist. Two of my patients, however, stay in my
mind. The first was a woman, about thirty-five years old. She looked fifty. She reminded me of a medieval
peasant - of my conception of a medieval peasant. She was dirty, clothes, hair, teeth; dirty with the kind of
filth that takes months to develop. She was unbearably shy; she approached anyone who she thought was
superior in status to her - which was virtually everyone - hunched over, with her eyes shaded by her hands,
both hands - as if she could not tolerate the light emanating from her target.
She had been in behavioral treatment in Montreal, as an outpatient, before, and was in fact a sight
known to the permanent staff at the clinic. Others had tried to help her overcome her unfortunate manner of
self-presentation, which made people on the street shy away from her; made them regard her as crazy and
unpredictable. She could learn to stand or sit up, temporarily, with eyes unguarded - but she reverted to her
old habits as soon as she left the clinic.
She may have been intellectually impaired, in consequence of some biological fault - it was difficult to
tell, because her environment was so appalling it may have caused her ignorance. She was illiterate, as
well. She lived with her mother - whose character I knew nothing about - and with an elderly, desperately
ill, bed-ridden aunt. Her boyfriend was a violent alcoholic schizophrenic who mistreated her
psychologically and physically; who was always muddling her simple mind with tirades about the Devil
and the worship of Satan. She had nothing going for her - no beauty, no intelligence, no loving family, no
skills, no employment - nothing.
She didn't come to therapy to resolve her problems, however - nor to unburden her soul, nor to describe
her mistreatment and victimization at the hands of others. She came because she wanted to do something
for someone who was worse off than her. The clinic where I was interning was associated with a large
psychiatric hospital. All of the patients that still remained after the shift to community care in the aftermath
of the sixties were so incapacitated that they could not survive on the streets. She had done some volunteer
work, of some limited type, in that hospital, and decided that she could maybe befriend a patient - take him
or her outside for a walk. I think she got this idea because she had a dog, which she walked regularly, and
which she liked to take care of. All she wanted from me was help arranging this - help finding someone
who she could take outside; help finding someone, in the hospital bureaucracy, who would allow this to
happen. I was not very successful in aiding her - but she didn't seem to hold that against me.
It is said that one piece of evidence that runs contrary to a theory is sufficient to disprove that theory. Of
course, people do not think this way, and perhaps should not. In general, a theory is too useful to give up,
easily - too difficult to regenerate - and the evidence against should be consistent and believable before it
is accepted. But the existence of this woman made me think. She was destined for a psychopathological
end, from the viewpoint of biological and environmental determinism - fated as surely as anyone I had
even met. And maybe she beat her dog sometimes, and was rude to her sick aunt. Maybe. I never saw her
vindictive, or unpleasant - even when her simple wishes were thwarted. I don't want to say that she was a
saint, because I didn't know her well enough to tell. But the fact was that in her misery and simplicity she
remained without self-pity, and able to see outside of herself. Why wasn't she a criminal - cruel,
unbalanced and miserable? She had every reason to be. And yet - she wasn't.
In her simple way, she had made the proper choices. She remained bloody, but unbowed. And she
seemed to me, rightly or wrongly, to be a symbol of suffering humanity, sorely afflicted, yet capable of
courage and love:
348 




"Such I created all the Ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood and them who failed;
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant faith, or love,
Where only what they needs must do appeared,
Not what they would? What praise could they receive
What pleasure I, from such obedience paid,
When Will and Reason (Reason also is Choice),
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoiled,
Made passive both, had served Necessity,
Not me? They, therefore, as to right belonged,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate,
As if Predestination overruled
Their will, disposed by absolute decree
Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I: if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, authors to themselves in all,
Both what they judge and what they choose; for so
I formed them free, and free they must remain
Till they enthrall themselves: I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high decree
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordained
Their freedom; they themselves ordained their fall."654
The other patient I wish to describe was a schizophrenic, in a small inpatient ward, at a different
hospital. He was about twenty-nine when I met him - a few years older than I was at the time - and had
been in and out of confinement for seven years. He was, of course, on anti-psychotic medication, and
participated in occupational-therapy activities on the ward - making coasters, and pencil holders, and so on,
but he could not maintain attention for any amount of time, and was not even much good at craft. My
supervisor asked me to administer an intelligence test to him - the standard WAIS-R655 (more for the sake
of my experience than for any possible diagnostic good). I gave my patient some of the red-and-white
blocks that made up the Block Design Subtest. He was supposed to arrange the blocks so they matched a
pattern printed on some cards. He picked them up, and started to re-arrange them on the desk in front of
him, while I timed him, stupidly, with a stop-watch. The task was impossible for him, even at the simplest
of stages. He looked constantly distracted, and frustrated. I asked, "what's wrong?" He said, "the battle
between good and evil in heaven is going on in my head."
I stopped the testing at that point. I didn't know exactly what to make of his comment. He was obviously
suffering, and the testing seemed to make it worse. What was he experiencing? He wasn't lying, that's for
sure. In the face of such a statement it seemed ridiculous to continue.
I spent some time with him that summer. I had never met someone who was so blatantly mentally ill.
We talked on the ward and, occasionally, I would take him for a walk through the hospital grounds outside.
He was the third son of first-generation immigrants. His first-born brother was a lawyer; the other, a
physician. His parents were obviously ambitious for their children, hard-working and disciplined. He had
been a graduate student, working towards a degree in immunology (?) - I don't precisely remember. His
brothers had set him a daunting example, and he felt pressure to succeed. His experimental work had not
turned out as he had expected, however, and he apparently came to believe that he might not graduate -
not, at least, when he had hoped to. So he faked his experimental results, and wrote up his thesis anyway.
349 













He told me that the night he finished writing, he woke up, and saw the Devil standing over him, at the
foot of his bed. This event triggered the onset of his mental illness, from which he had never recovered. It
might be said that the Satanic apparition merely accompanied the expression of some pathological stressinduced
neural development, whose appearance was biologically predetermined, or that the Devil was
merely personification of his culture's conception of moral evil, manifesting itself in imagination, as a
consequence of his guilt. Both of these levels of description have their merits. But the fact remains that he
saw the Devil, and that the vision accompanied or even was the event that destroyed him.
He was afraid to tell me much of his fantasy, and it was only after I had paid careful attention to him that
he opened up. He was not bragging, or trying to impress me. He was terrified about what he believed;
terrified as a consequence of the fantasies that impressed themselves upon him. He told me that he could
not leave the hospital, because someone was waiting to shoot him - a typical paranoid delusion. Why did
someone want to kill him?
Well, he was hospitalized during the cold war - not at its height, perhaps, but still during a time when
the threat of purposeful nuclear annihilation seemed more plausible, more likely, than it does now. Many of
the people I knew used the existence of this threat to justify, to themselves, their failure to participate fully
in life - a life which they thought of, romantically, as doomed, and therefore as pointless. But there was
some real terror in the pose, and the thought of the countless missiles pointed here and there around the
world sapped the energy and faith of everyone, hypocritical or not.
My schizophrenic patient believed that he was, in fact, the incarnation of the world-annihilating force;
that he was destined, upon his release from the hospital, to make his way south to a nuclear missile silo, on
American territory; that he was fated to make the decision that would launch the final war. The "people"
outside the hospital knew this, and that is why they were waiting to shoot him. He did not want to tell me
this story, in consequence - although he did - because he thought I might then want to kill him too.
My friends in graduate school thought it ironic that I had contact with a patient of this type. My peculiar
interest in Jung, and Jung's ideas regarding the collective unconscious, were well known to them, and it
seemed absurdly fitting that I would end up talking to someone with delusions of this type. But I didn't
know what to do with his ideas. Of course, they were crazy, and they had done in my patient. But it still
seemed to me that they were true, from the metaphorical viewpoint.
His story, in totality, linked his individual choice, between good and evil, with the cumulative horror
then facing the world. His story implied that because he had given in to temptation, at a critical juncture, he
was in fact responsible for the horror of the potential of nuclear war. But how could this be? It seemed
insane to me to even consider that the act of one powerless individual could be linked in some manner to
the outcome of history as a whole.
But I am no longer so sure. I have read much about evil, and its manner of perpetration and growth, and
I am no longer convinced that each of us are so innocent, so harmless. It is of course illogical to presume
that one person - one speck of dust, among six billion motes - is in any sense responsible for the horrible
course of human events. But that course in itself is not logical, far from it - and it seems likely that it
depends on processes that we do not understand.
The most powerful arguments for the non-existence of God (at least a good God) are predicated on the
idea that such a Being would not allow for the existence of evil in its classical natural (diseases, disasters)
or moral (war, pogroms) forms. Such arguments can be taken further, even, than atheism - can be used to
disupte the justice of the existent world itself. Dostoevsky states: "Perhaps the entire cosmos is not worth a
single innocent child's suffering." How can the universe be constructed such that pain is permitted? How
can a good God allow for the existence of a suffering world?
These difficult questions can be addressed, in part, as a consequence of careful analysis of evil. First, it
seems reasonable to insist upon the value of the natural/moral distinction. The "tragic circumstances of
life" should not be placed in the same category as "willfully undertaken harm." Tragedy - subjugation to
the mortal conditions of existencde - has an ennobling aspect, at least in potential, and has been constantly
exploited to that end in great literature and mythology. True evil, by contrast, is anything but noble.
Participation in acts whose sole purpose is expansion of innocent pain and suffering destroys character;
forthright encounter with tragedy, by contrast, may increase it. This is the meaning of the Christian myth of
the crucifixion. It is Christ's full participation in and freely-chosen acceptance of his fate (which he shares
with all mankind) that enables him to manifest his full identity with God - and it is that identity which
350 





enables him to bear that fate, and which strips it of its evil. Conversely - it is the voluntary demeaning of
our own characters which makes the necessary tragic conditions of existence appear evil.
But why is life tragic? Why are we subject to unbearable limitation - to pain, disease, and death; to
cruelty at the hands of nature and society? Why do terrible things happen to everyone? These are, of
course, unanswerable questions. But they must be answered, somehow, if we are to be able to face our own
lives.
The best I can make of it is this (and this has helped me): Nothing can exist without preconditions. Even
a game cannot be played without rules - and the rules say what cannot be done, as much as what can.
Perhaps the world is not possible, as a world, without its borders - without its rules. Maybe existence
wouldn't be possible, in the absence of our painful limitations.
Think of it this way: If we could have everything we wanted, merely for wishing it - if every tool
performed every job, if all men were omniscient and immortal - then everything would be the same, the
same all-powerful thing, God, and creation would never exist. It is the differences between things - which
is a function of their specific limitations - that allows them to exist at all.
But the fact that things do exist does not mean that they should exist - even if we are willing to grant
them their necessary limitations.
Should the world exist? Are the preconditions of experience so terrible that the whole game should be
called off? (and there is never any shortage of people working diligently towards this end).
It seems to me that we answer this question, implicitly but profoundly, when we lose someone we loved,
and then grieve. This is a very common experience. I don't think we cry because they existed, either - but
because they are lost. This presupposes a judgment rendered, at a very fundamental level of analysis. Grief
presupposes having loved, presupposes the judgment that this person's specific, bounded existence was
valuable, was something that should have been (even in its inevitably imperfect and vulnerable form). But
still the question lingers - why should things, even loved things, exist at all, if their necessary limitations
cause such suffering?
Perhaps we could reserve answer to the question of God's nature, his responsibility for the presence of
the evil in creation, until we have solved the problem of our own. Perhaps we could tolerate the horrors of
the world if we left our own characters intact, and developed them to the fullest; if we took full advantage
of every gift we have been granted. Perhaps the world would not look horrible then.
I dreamed I was walking up out of a deep valley, along a paved two-lane highway. The highway was
located in northern Alberta, where I grew up, and came out of the only valley for miles around, in the
endlessly flat prairie. I passed a man, hitchhiking, and could see another in the distance. As I
approached him I could see that he was in the first stages of old age; but he still looked terribly strong.
Someone passed him in a car, driving the opposite direction, and a female voice yelled, "look out - he
has a knife!"
He was carrying what looked like a wooden-handled kitchen knife, well-worn and discolored, but it
had a blade at least two and a half feet long. Across his shoulder he had strapped a large leather sheaf.
He was walking along the edge of the highway, muttering to himself, and swinging the blade in a jerky
and chaotic fashion.
He looked like the landlord who lived next door to me when I was a graduate student, living in a poor
district, in Montreal. My landlord was a powerful, aging ex-biker - former president of the local Hell's
Angels chapter, by his own account - who had spent some time in prison, as a younger man. He had
settled down somewhat, typically, as he became more mature, and had brought his drinking under
control for a long time. His wife committed suicide when I lived there, however, and he went back to his
wilder ways. He often went on binge drinking sprees, and spent all the money he earned in the
electronics shop he ran out of his small apartment. He would drink 40 or even 50 beer in a single day,
and would return home in the evening, blind drunk, howling at his little dog, laughing, hissing between
his teeth, incoherent, good-natured still, but able to become violent at the slightest provocation. He took
me once to his favourite haunts, in slightly better condition, on his 1200 cc Honda, which had the
acceleration of a jet plane, for short distances, me perched precariously on the back of his bike, clinging
to him, wearing his wife's helmet, which sat on my head ridiculously, uselessly - as it was at least five
351 






sizes too small. Drunk, he was almost innocently destructive, and ended up in fights constantly,
unavoidably - as he would take slights from people whose path he crossed, who were insufficiently
cautious in their conversation with him.
I hurried by this figure. He seemed upset that no one would stop and pick him up, as if he were
unaware of the danger he posed. As I went by, his gaze fell on me, and he started after me - not from
anger; more for desire for companionship, I think - but he was too unpredictable for me. He was not
fast, however, and I easily stayed ahead of him on the road.
The scene shifted. The knife-wielding figure and I were now on opposite sides of an immense tree -
perhaps a hundred yards in diameter - on a spiral staircase emerging from the dark below and
ascending equally far above. The staircase was made of old, worn dark wood, and reminded me of the
church pews in the church I attended with my mother as a child, and where I was married. The figure
was looking for me, but he was a long way back, and I had hid myself from his view, as I ascended the
staircase. I remember wanting to continue on my original journey, out of the valley, onto the flat
surrounding plain, where the walking would be easy - but the only way to stay away from the knife was
to continue up the staircase - up the axis mundi. Thus awareness of death, the grim reaper - the terrible
face of God - compels us inexorably upwards, towards a consciousness sufficiently heightened to bear
the thought of death.
The point of our limitations is not suffering; it is existence itself. We have been granted the capacity to
voluntarily bear the terrible weight of our mortality. We turn from that capacity and degrade ourselves
because we are afraid of responsibility. Thus the necessarily tragic preconditions of existence are made
intolerable.
It seems to me that it is not the earthquake, the flood or the cancer that makes life intolerable, horrible as
those events appear. We seem capable of withstanding natural disaster, even of responding to that disaster
in an honourable and decent manner. It is rather the pointless suffering that we inflict upon each other - our
evil - that makes life appear corrupt beyond acceptability; that undermines our ability to manifest faith in
our central natures. So why should the capacity for evil exist?
I have been teaching my six-year old daughter to play the piano. I am trying to teach her hard lessons -
that is, trying to show her that there is really a right way to play the piano, and a wrong way. The right
way involves paying attention to each phrase, each written note, every sound she makes, every finger
motion. I taught her what rhythm meant, a few weeks ago, in one difficult lesson. And what does difficult
mean? Well, she will sit at the piano and work so hard that she cries - but she won't stop. And she is
really interested in learning to play. She spends time in the car listening to music, working out the
rhythms. She uses the metronome by herself, playing songs she likes faster and slower. Yesterday I
taught her the difference between playing loudly and playing softly. She found this challenging,
experimenting carefully with each key on our old piano (which has many idiosyncracies), trying to
determine exactly how hard it had to be pressed to emit a whispery tone.
I woke up the morning after one of her lessons, and caught a fragment of the end of a dream-revery.
This is the idea revealed by that revery: it is the fact that there are differences between paths of action
that makes actions worthwhile. I know that what is believed determines the value of things. But I had
never taken this argument to its logical conclusion. If belief determines value, then the distance between
good and evil gives life its meaning. The more worthwhile a path of action (which is to say, the "better"
it is - the more it is good, rather than evil) the more positive emotional valence that path "contains."
This means that things have no meaning, because no differential value, for those who do not believe in
good and evil.
I have certainly known people in that position (although I did not know explicitly that they were in
that position because they did not know the difference between good and evil). They were unable to do
anything, because they could not tell the difference between one path and another. And it was the case
that in the absence of differences between one thing and another, life began to appear a "cruel and
352 






meaningless joke," to use Tolstoy's phrase. I guess that was because the burdens of life did not appear
worth sustaining in the absence of evidence that striving and work had any real value.
This all means: value is a continuum, a line stretching from necessary point a to necessary point b.
"A" and "b" are defined in relation to one another, as two points define a line. The polarity between
the two determines the valence of the goal. The more polarity (that is, the more tension) between the two
points, the more worthwhile the enterprise. Good cannot be defined - cannot exist - in the absence of
evil. Value cannot exist in the absence of polarity. So, for the world to be worthwhile (that is, for the
choice between two things to constitute a real choice) both good and evil have to exist.
But then it would be possible to only choose good, at least in the ideal - and then evil would not exist,
except in potential. So it appears that the world could be valuable (could justify the burden it requires to
maintain) if evil were only to exist in potential - if everyone chose to act properly, that is. This seems to
me to be the most optimistic thought that I have ever encountered.
But how can we stop being foolish? What path can we follow, to eliminate our blindness and stupidity; to
bring us closer to the light? Christ said, Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father in heaven is perfect.656 But
how? We seem stymied, as always, by Pontius Pilate's ironic query: What is truth? (John 18:38.)
Well, even if we don't know precisely what the truth is, we can certainly tell, each of us, what it isn't. It
isn't greed, and the desire, above all else, for constant material gain; it isn't denial of experience we know
full well to be real, and the infliction of suffering, for the purpose of suffering. Perhaps it is possible to stop
doing those things which we know, beyond doubt, to be wrong - to become self-disciplined, and honest -
and to therefore become ever more able to perceive the nature of the positive good.
The truth seems painfully simple - so simple that it is a miracle, of sorts, that it can every be forgotten.
Love God, with all thy mind, and all thy acts, and all thy heart. This means, serve truth above all else, and
treat your fellow man as if he were yourself - not with the pity that undermines his self-respect, and not
with the justice that elevates yourself above him - but as a divinity, heavily burdened, who could yet see
the light.
It is said, it is more difficult to rule oneself, than a city - and this is no metaphor. This is truth, as literal
as it can be made. It is precisely for this reason that we are always trying to rule the city. It is a perversion
of pride to cease praying in public, and to clean up the dust under our feet, instead; seems too mundane to
treat those we actually face with respect and dignity, when we could be active, against, in the street. Maybe
it is more important to strengthen our characters, than to repair the world. So much of that reparation seems
selfish, anyway; is selfishness and intellectual pride masquerading as love, creating a world polluted with
good works, that don't work.
Who can believe that it is the little choices we make, every day, between good and evil, that turn the
world to waste and hope to despair? But it is the case. We see our immense capacity for evil, constantly
realized before us, in great things and in small - but can never seem to realize our infinite capacity for
good. Who can argue with a Solzhenitsyn when he states: "One man who stops lying can bring down a
tyranny"?
Christ said, the kingdom of Heaven is spread out upon the earth, but men do not see it.657 What if it was
nothing but our self-deceit, our cowardice, hatred and fear, that pollutes our experience and turns the world
into Hell? This is a hypothesis, at least - as good as any other, admirable and capable of generating hope -
why can't we make the experiment, and find out if it is true?
5.4.2. The Divinity of Interest
"The central ideas of Christianity are rooted in Gnostic philosophy, which, in accordance with
psychological laws, simply had to grow up at a time when the classical religions had become obsolete. It
was founded on the perception of symbols thrown up by the unconscious individuation process which
always sets in when the collective dominants of human life fall into decay. At such a time there is bound
to be a considerable number of individuals who are possesed by archetypes of a numinous nature that
force their way to the surface in order to form new dominants.
353 


 This state of possession shows itself almost without exception in the fact that the possessed identify
themselves with the archetypal contents of their unconscious, and, because they do not realize that the
role which is being thrust upon them is the effect of new contents still to be understood, they exemplify
these concretely in their own lives, thus becoming prophets and reformers.
In so far as the archetypal content of the Christian drama was able to give satisfying expression to the
uneasy and clamorous unconscious of the many, the consensus omnium raised this drama to a
universally binding truth - not of course by an act of judgment, but by the irrational fact of possession,
which is far more effective.
Thus Jesus became the tutelary image or amulet against the archetypal powers that threatened to
possess everyone. The glad tidings announced: 'It has happened, but it will not happen to you inasmuch
as you believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God!'
Yet it could and it can and it will happen to everyone in whom the Christian dominant has decayed.
For this reason there have always been people who, not satisfied with the dominants of conscious life,
set forth - under cover and by devious paths, to their destruction or salvation - to seek direct experience
of the eternal roots and, following the lure of the restless unconscious psyche, find themselves in the
wilderness where, like Jesus, they come up against the son of darkness....
Thus an old alchemist - and he a cleric! - prays... 'Purge the horrible darknesses of our minds, light a
light for our senses!' The author of this sentence must have been undergoing the experience of the
nigredo, the first stage of the work, which was felt as melancholia in alchemy and corresponds to the
encounter with the shadow in psychology.
When, therefore, modern psychotherapy once more meets with the activated archetypes of the
collective unconscious, it is merely the repetition of a phenomenon that has often been observed in
moments of great religious crisis, although it can also occur in individuals for whom the ruling ideas
have lost their meaning. An example of this it the descensus ad inferos in Faust which, consciously or
unconsciously, is an opus alchymicum.
The problem of opposites called up by the shadow plays a great - indeed, the decisive - role in
alchemy, since it leads in the ultimate phase of the work to the union of opposites in the archetypal form
of the hierosgamos or "chymical wedding." Here the supreme opposites, male and female (as in the
Chinese ying and yang), are melted into a unity purified of all opposition and therefore incorruptible."658
November, 1986
Dear Dad
I promised you that one day I would tell you what the book I am trying to write is supposed to be about.
I haven't been working on it much in the last month, although in some regards it is always on my mind and
everything I learn, in my other work, has some bearing upon it. Because I have abandoned it, temporarily, I
thought perhaps I could tell you about it, and that would help me organize my thoughts.
I don't completely understand the driving force behind what I have been working on, although I
understand it better now than I used to, three or four years ago, when it was literally driving me crazy. I
had been obsessed with the idea of war for three or four years prior to that, often dreaming extremely
violent dreams, centered around the theme of destruction. I believe now that my concern with death on a
mass scale was intimately tied into my personal life, and that concerns with the meaning of life on a
personal level (which arise with the contemplation of death) took a general form for me, which had to do
with the value of humanity, and the purpose of life in general.
Carl Jung has suggested that all personal problems are relevant to society, because we are all so much
alike, and that any sufficiently profound solution to a personal problem may, if communicated, reduce the
likelihood of that problem existing in anyone's experience in the future.659 This is in fact how society and
the individual support one another. It was in this way that my concern with war, which is the application of
death on the general level, led me into concepts and ideas concerning the meaning of life on the personal
354 





level, which I could never have imagined as relevant, or believable, prior to learning about them - and
which I still believe border on what might normally be considered insanity.
The reasons for war, many believe, are rooted in politics. Since it is groups of men that fight, and since
groups indulge in politics, this belief seems well-founded and in fact contains some truth. It is just as true,
however, that it is a good thing to look for something you don't want to find in a place where you know it
won't be - and the modern concern with global politics, and the necessity to be involved in a "good
cause," rather than to live responsibly, seems to me to be evidence that the desire not to find often
overpowers the real search for truth. You see, it is true that people don't want the truth, because the truth
destroys what lack of faith erects, and the false comfort it contains. It is not possible to live in the world
that you wish could be, and in the real world at the same time, and it often seems a bad bargain to destroy
fantasy for reality. It is desire for lack of responsibility that underlies this evasion, in part - but it is also
fear of possibility. At least this is how it seems to me.
Because everyone is a product of their times, and because that applies to me as well, I looked for what I
wanted to find where it was obvious to everyone it would be - in politics, in political science, in the study of
group behavior. This took up the years I spent involved with the NDP, and in studying political science,
until I learned that the application of a system of thought, like socialism (or any other ism, for that matter)
to a problem, and solving that problem, were not the same thing. In the former case, you have someone
(who is not you) to blame - the rich, the Americans, the white people, the government, the system -
whatever, as long as it is someone else.
I came to realize, slowly, that a problem of global proportions existed as a problem because everyone
on the globe thought and acted to maintain that problem. Now what that means is that if the problem has a
solution, then what everyone thinks is wrong - and that meant, too, that what I thought had to be
fundamentally wrong. Now the problem with this line of reasoning is simple. It leads inexorably to the
following conclusion: the more fundamental the problem, the more fundamental the error - in my own
viewpoint.
I came to believe that survival itself, and more, depended upon a solution to the problem of war. This
made me consider that perhaps everything I believed was wrong. This consideration was not particularly
pleasant, and was severely complicated by the fact that I had also come to realize that, although I definitely
believed a variety of things, I did not always know what I believed - and when I knew what, I did not know
why.
You see, history itself conditioned everything I believed, even when I did not know it, and it was sheer
unconscious arrogance that made me posit to begin with that I had half a notion of who or what I was, or
what the processes of history had created, and how I was affected by that creation.
It is one thing to be unconscious of the answers, and quite another to be unable to even consider the
question.
I had a notion that confronting what terrified me - what turned my dreams against me - could help me
withstand that terrible thing. This idea - granted me by the grace of God - allowed me to believe that I
could find what I most wanted (if I could tolerate the truth; if I was willing to follow wherever it led me; if I
was willing to devote my life to acting upon what I had discovered, whatever that might be, without
reservation - knowing somehow that once started, an aborted attempt would destroy at least my selfrespect,
at most my sanity and desire to live).
I believe now that everyone has this choice in front of them, even when they do not know or refuse to
admit it; that everyone makes this choice, with every decision and action they take.
I mentioned earlier that history conditioned what I think and acted. Pursuit of this realization - which is
rather self-evident, once realized - has lead me to the study of history, as a psychological phenomenon.
You see, if what I think and am is a product of history, that means that history must take form inside me, so
to speak, and from inside me determine who I am. This is easier to understand if you consider that I carry
around inside me an image of you - composed of memories of how you act, and what you expected, and
depictions of your behavior. This image has had profound impact on how I behaved, as a child - when,
even in your absence, I was compelled to follow the rules which you followed (and which I learned through
imitation, and which you instilled into me, through praise and punishment). Sometimes that image of you,
in me, even takes the form of a personality, when I dream about you.
355 








So it is a straightforward matter to believe, from the psychological point of view, that each individual
carries around an image of his parents, and that this image governs his behavior, at least in part.
But you see it is the case that the rules that you followed - and which I learned from you - were not
rules that you yourself created, but rather those that you handed to me just as you had been handed them
while still a child.
And it is more than likely true that the majority of what I learned from you was never verbalized - that
the rules which governed the way you acted (and that I learned while watching you) were implicit in your
behavior, and are now implicit in mine. It was exactly in this manner that I learned language - mostly from
watching and listening, partly from explicit instruction. And just as it is certainly possible (and most
commonly so) to speak correctly and yet to be unable to describe the rules of grammar that "underly" the
production of language, it is possible to act upon the world and make assumptions about its nature without
knowing much about the values and beliefs that necessarily underly those actions and assumptions.
The structure of our language has been created in a historical process, and is in a sense an embodiment
of that process. The structure of that which governs our actions and perceptions has also been created
during the course of history, and is the embodiment of history.
The implications of this idea overwhelmed me. I have been attempting to consider history itself as a
unitary phenomenon - as a single thing, in a sense - in order to understand what it is, and how it affects
what I think and do. If you realize that history is in some sense in your head, and you also realize that you
know nothing of the significance of history, of its meaning - which is almost certainly true - then you must
realize that you know nothing of the significance of yourself, and of your own meaning.
I am writing my book in an attempt to explain the psychological significance of history - to explain the
meaning of history. In doing so, I have "discovered" a number of interesting things:
1. All cultures, excepting the Western, do not possess a history based on "objective events." The history
of alternative cultures - even those as highly developed as the Indian, Chinese, and ancient Greco-Roman
- is mythological, which means that it describes what an event meant, in psychological terms, instead of
how it happened, in empirical terms.
2. All cultures, even those most disparate in nature, develop among broadly predictable lines, and have,
within their mythological history, certain constant features (just as all languages share grammatical
structure, given a sufficiently abstract analysis). The lines among which culture develops are determined
biologically, and the rules which govern that development are the consequence of the pyschological
expression of neurophysiological structures. (This thesis will be the most difficult for me to prove, but I
have some solid evidence in its favour, and as I study more neuroanatomy and neuropsychology, the
evidence becomes more clear).
3. Mythological renditions of history, like those in the Bible, are just as "true" as the standard Western
empirical renditions, just as literally true, but how they are true is different. Western historians describe
(or think they describe) "what" happened. The traditions of mythology and religion describe the
significance of what happened (and it must be noted that if what happens is without significance, it is
irrelevant).
Anyway - I can't explain in one letter the full scope of what I am planning to do. In this book, I hope to
describe a number of historical tendencies, and how they affect individual behavior - in the manner I have
attempted in this letter. More importantly, perhaps, I hope to describe not only what the problem is (in
historical terms), but where a possible solution might lie, and what that solution conceivably could be -
and I hope to describe it in a manner that makes its application possible.
If you're interested in me telling you more (I can't always tell if someone is interested) then I will, later.
I don't know, Dad, but I think I have discovered something that no one else has any idea about, and I'm not
sure I can do it justice. Its scope is so broad that I can only see parts of it clearly at one time, and it is
exceedingly difficult to set down comprehensibly in writing. You see, most of the kind of knowledge that I
am trying to transmit verbally and logically has always been passed down from one person to another by
means of art and music and religion and tradition, and not by rational explanation, and it is like
translating from one language to another. It's not just a different language, though - it is an entirely
different mode of experience.
Anyways
I'm glad that you and Mom are doing well. Thank you for doing my income tax returns.
356 












Jordan
It has been almost fifteen years since I first grasped the essence of the paradox that lies at the bottom of
human motivation for evil: People need their group identification, because that identification protects them,
literally, from the terrible forces of the unknown. It is for this reason that every individual who is not
decadent will strive to protect his territory, actual and psychological. But the tendency to protect means
hatred of the other, and the inevitability of war - and we are now too technologically powerful to engage in
war. To allow the other victory, however - or even continued existence, on his terms - means subjugation,
dissolution of protective structure, and exposure to that which is most feared. For me, this meant -
"damned if you do, damned if you don't": belief systems regulate affect, but conflict between belief
systems is inevitable.
Formulation and understanding of this terrible paradox devastated me. I had always been convinced that
sufficient understanding of a problem - any problem - would lead to its resolution. Here I was, however -
possessed of understanding that seemed not only sufficient but complete - caught nonetheless between the
devil and the deep blue sea. I could not see how there could be any alternative to either having a belief
system or to not having a belief system - and could see little but the disadvantage of both positions. This
truly shook my faith.
I turned, in consequence, to my dreams - acting on a tip from Jung, who had proposed that the dream
might contain information, when no other source could suffice. I had already learned a lot of things I would
have never dreamed of - ha ha - by doing that. But my dreams dried up, just when I needed them most, and
no information was forthcoming. I was in a kind of stasis, at a standstill.
This was very painful for me. I had spent several years intensely working and thinking - trying to
understand individual human motivation for the worst possible human actions. I was doing what I truly
believed was best, to the best of my ability - and doing it in spite of its substantial interference with my
personal and professional lives. I had decided to devote my life to the problem of evil - to the development
of a true understanding of evil, in the hopes of finding some means of combatting it - yet my search had
come to a stop, a dead end. This did not seem reasonable. I truly believed I deserved better.
Then, one night, my dreams came back, with a vengeance. I had the following nightmare, as terrible and
potent as the dreams of destruction that had started my quest, several years before:
I dreamed I was living in a two-storey house. After a bout of heavy drinking, I went to the attic and fell
asleep. After I fell asleep, I had the following dream - nested within a dream:
I was trapped in a huge chandelier, which was hanging directly beneath the dome of an immense
darkened cathedral. The chandelier hung hundreds of feet below its point of connection on the dome,
and was still so high off the ground that the people below, on the floor, looked like ants. These people
were in charge of the cathedral, and I could tell that they were angry at me for being where I was. I did
not feel guilty, because I was not there by choice - I just happened to have arrived there, and I wanted
to leave.
I realized I was dreaming, and shook myself "awake," as a means of removing myself from my
uncomfortable position. But when I "awoke," I still found myself suspended in the same place. I tried to
deny this, by falling back asleep - reasoning that it was better to be dreaming about this circumstance
than to actually be trapped in it. However, I could not return to my previous unconscious state, and
stayed painfully awake.
Then I found myself on the ground, as a consequence of some process, whose nature I cannot recall.
The people of the cathedral protested my presence but didn't really bother me. All I wanted to do was
get home, where it was familiar, and go back to sleep.
When I returned home, I went into a small, windowless room - I think it was the furnace room - in
the middle of the ground floor of my house. This room was surrounded by other rooms; it had no contact
point with the outside. There was a small single bed there, that was actually much like my real bed. I
crawled into it, and tried to fall asleep, but a strange wind descended on me. Under its influence, I
started to dissolve. I knew beyond a shadow of a doubt that it was going to transport me back to the
chandelier, in the center of the cathedral. I attempted to fight the wind, but found that I was virtually
357 


paralyzed, and in some sort of convulsion. I tried desperately to yell for help, and actually awakened -
at least partially.
The windows behind my bed in my real room were wide open, and a wind was blowing through them.
I frantically closed them, and then turned around. In front of me, while awake, was a huge double door,
like that on a gothic cathedral, between my bedroom and the adjacent room, which were only partially
separated. I shook myself, and the apparition disappeared. The terror I was experiencing vanished much
more slowly.
I had read much of the Gospels in the New Testament earlier that day - which might account for the initial
reference to the drinking bout (the imbibing of spirit, so to speak). I formulated an interpretation of the
dream - an essentially unacceptable formulation - immediately upon awakening. I knew that the word
"spirit" had been derived from the Greek pneuma - which meant wind: the wind, for example, that moved
upon the water, in Genesis; the wind or breath that God blew into the adamah, the matter, to make man.
I found myself at the central point of a cathedral, in my dream - and I could not escape. A cathedral is
"sacred space," designed to keep the forces of chaos at bay; it has the same layout as the cross. The central
point of a cathedral is, symbolically, the place where Christ was crucified, and the center of the universe -
simultaneously. All the forces embodied in my dream were conspiring to put me there, awake, despite my
best efforts to the contrary. I could not, at that time, accept the implications of that dream (could not believe
the implications), and it has taken me a long time to assimilate its meaning:
"'He that believeth on Me, the works that I do he shall do also, and greater works than these shall he do'
(John 14:12).
The quotation from John is taken from the fourteenth chapter, where Christ teaches that whoever sees
him sees the Father. He is in the Father and the Father is in him. The disciples are in him and he in them,
moreover they will be sent the Holy Ghost as Paraclete and will do works that are greater than his own.
This fourteenth chapter broaches a question that was to have great repercussions for the future: the
problem of the Holy Ghost who will remain when Christ has gone, and who intensifies the
interpenetration of the divine and the human to such a degree that we can properly speak of a
"Christification" of the disciples....
It is easy to see what happens when the logical conclusion is drawn from the fourteenth chapter of
John: the opus Christi is transferred to the individual. He then becomes the bearer of the mystery, and
this development was unconsciously prefigured and anticipated in alchemy, which showed clear signs of
becoming a religion of the Holy Ghost and of the Sapientia Dei."660
Myths of the origin commonly portray the condition of paradise as the source of all things. The paradisal
initial condition, disrupted by the events of the fall, also serves as the goal towards which history proceeds.
Stories of the fall describe the introduction of uncontrollable anxiety into human experience, as the
consequence of traumatically heightened consciousness - as the result of irrevocably attained knowledge of
human vulnerability and mortality. Re-establishment of paradise, in the aftermath of such attainment,
becomes dependent upon manifestation of an exemplary way of behaving, directed towards a meaningful
end - becomes dependent upon establishment of a particular mode of redemption:
"An old English legend reports what Seth saw in the Garden of Eden. In the midst of paradise there rose
a shining fountain, from which four streams flowed, watering the whole world. Over the fountain stood
a great tree with many branches and twigs, but it looked like an old tree, for it had no bark and no
leaves. Seth knew that this was the tree of whose fruit his parents had eaten, for which reason it now
stood bare. Looking more closely, Seth saw that a naked snake without a skin had coiled itself round the
tree. It was the serpent by whom Eve had been persuaded to eat of the forbidden fruit. When Seth took a
second look at paradise he saw that the tree had undergone a great change. It was now covered with bark
and leaves, and in its crown lay a little new-born babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, that wailed
because of Adam's sin. This was Christ, the second Adam. He is found in the top of the tree that grows
out of Adam's body in representations of Christ's genealogy."661
358 
Figure 67: The Restitution of [Christ] the Mystic Apple to the Tree of Knowledge.
359 
Figure 68: The Eternal Return of the Boddhisatva
360 









The tree, the axis mundi, is without bark and leaves because has been mortally affected, as a consequence
of the fall. Production of its first fruit - self-reference - placed it in shock, exhausted its resources. Its
second fruit, associated with re-emergence into lush life and health, is the savior, the hero who redeems
mankind from the consequences of the fall,662 the divine individual whose path of being leads back to
paradise.663 This notion is represented imagistically (it has never really proceeded much past the image) in
Figure 67: The Restitution of [Christ] the Mystic Apple to the Tree of Knowledge. 664 A similar pattern of
redemptive ideation informs the East. For Gautama, suffering and disenchantment are the (necessary)
preconditions of adult enlightenment (the name of the Buddha - Siddhartha - literally means "goal
attained" 665). The "enlightened one," whose mode of being in the world transcends the suffering in that
world, is an eternal spirit (that is, an eternally recurrent spirit), despite "historical" incarnation in the figure
of the Buddha. Figure 68: The Eternal Return of the Boddhisatva 666 portrays this spirit, forever dominant
over the mass of mankind and the great and terrible mother. The bodhisattva, the central "character" in this
figure, is an Oriental Christ-equivalent (or, perhaps, an image of the paraclete or Holy Ghost). The creator
of this work has superimposed the bodhisattva on a "tunnel" in the sky, ringed by transformative fire. This
tunnel adds a temporal dimension to the spatial dimensions represented in the image, and allows for the
portrayal of the constant recurrence, throughout time, of the heroic spirit. This is a reflection of the same
idea that drove Christian thinkers to attribute prehistorical (and eternal) reality to Christ, despite his
"historical" nature; as well, that drove speculation about the "spirit of truth" Christ left behind, after his
death.
Myths of the fall and redemption portray the emergence of human dissatisfaction with present
conditions - no matter how comfortable - and the tendency or desire for movement towards "a better
future." Such myths describe, in narrative format, how human beings think - and will always think -
regardless of time or place. The most profound of such cyclical myths portray heightening of consciousness
as cause for emergent unrest - simultaneously portray qualitatively transformed consciousness as cure for
that unrest ( - more profoundly - portray participation in the act of qualitative transformation of
consciousness as cure for that unrest).
Proclivity to posit an ideal, implicitly or explicitly, to work towards its attainment, to become
dissatisfied with its establishment, as new "matter" makes itself manifest, and to thereby re-enter the cycle
- this constitutes the centrally defining pattern of human abstraction and behavior. The simplest and most
basic day-to-day human activities, invariably goal-directed, are necessarily predicated upon conscious or
tradition-bound acceptance of a value hierarchy, defining the desired future in positive contrast to the
insufficient present. To live, from the human perspective, is to act in light of what is valued, what is
desired, what should be - and to maintain sufficient ignorance, in a sense, to allow belief in such value to
flourish. Collapse of faith in the value hierarchy - or, more dangerously - collapse of faith in the idea of
such hierarchies - brings about severe depression, intrapsychic chaos, and re-emergence of existential
anxiety.
The myth of the fall from paradise describes the development of human self-consciousness as a great
tragedy - as the greatest conceivable anomaly - as an event that permanently altered the structure of the
universe; as an event that doomed humanity to suffering and death. But it was this same fall that enabled
the individual to adopt the redemptive role of the hero, the creator of culture; the same fall that lifted the
curtain on the drama of human history. Whether or not it would have been better for humanity to have
remained unconscious is no longer a point that can be usefully considered - although that path does not
seem particularly productive for those who take it now. Adam's original sin has tainted everyone; there is
no way back.
For much of human history - after the fall, so to speak - the individual remained firmly ensconced
within the confines of a religious dream, which gave meaning to the tragedy of existence. Many modern
thinkers, including Freud, viewed that dream in retrospect as defensive, as a barrier of fantasy erected
against the existential anxiety generated by knowledge of mortality. However, the dividing line between
fantasy and reality is not so easily drawn. It is certainly possible to disappear voluntarily into the mists of
delusion; to withdraw into the comforts of denial from a world terrible beyond what can be borne.
Imagination is not always insanity, however; its use does not always imply regression. Imagination and
fantasy allow each of us to deal with the unknown, which must be met before it is comprehended. Fantasy
applied to consideration of the unknown is therefore not delusory. It is, instead, the first stage in the process
361 









of understanding which eventually results in the evolution of detailed, empirical, communicable
knowledge. Fantasy can be used to create the real world, as well as the world of illusion. It all depends on
who is doing the imagining, and to what end.
When pre-experimental man conceived of the unknown as an ambivalent mother, he was not indulging
in childish fantasy. He was applying what he knew to what was unfamiliar, but could not be ignored. Man's
first attempts to describe the unknown cannot be faulted because they lacked empirical validity. Man was
not originally an empirical thinker. This does not mean he was self-deluded, a liar. Likewise, when the
individual worships the hero, he is not necessarily hiding from reality. It may also be that he is ready and
willing to face the unknown, as an individual; that he is prepared to adopt the pattern of heroic endeavour
in his own life, and to further creation in that manner.
The great myths of Christianity - the great myths of the past, in general - no longer speak to the
majority of westerners, who regard themselves as educated. The mythic view of history cannot be credited
with reality, from the material, empirical point of view. It is nonetheless the case that all of western ethics,
including those explicitly formalized in western law, are predicated upon a mythological world-view,
which specifically attributes divine status to the individual. The modern individual is therefore in a unique
position: he no longer believes that the principles upon which all his behaviors are predicated are valid.
This might be considered a second fall, in that the destruction of the western mythological barrier has reexposed
the essential tragedy of individual existence to view.
It is not the pursuit of empirical truth, however, that has wreaked havoc upon the Christian worldview: it
is confusion of empirical fact with moral truth, to the great detriment of the latter. This confusion has
produced what might be described as a secondary gain, which has played an important role in maintaining
the confusion. That gain is abdication of the absolute personal responsibility imposed in consequence of
recognition of the divine in man. This responsibility means acceptance of the trials and tribulations
associated with expression of unique individuality, as well as respect for such expression in others. Such
acceptance, expression and respect requires courage in the absence of certainty, and discipline in the
smallest matters.
Rejection of moral truth allows for rationalization of cowardly, destructive, degenerate self-indulgence.
This is one of the most potent attractions of such rejection, and constitutes primary motivation for the lie.
The lie, above all else, threatens the individual - and the interpersonal. The lie is predicated upon the
presupposition that the tragedy of individuality is unbearable - that human experience itself is evil. The
individual lies because he is afraid - and it is not the lies he tells another that present the clearest danger,
but the lies he tells himself. The root of social and individual psychopathology, the "denial," the
"repression" - is the lie. The most dangerous lie of all is devoted towards denial of individual responsibility
- towards denial of individual divinity.
The idea of the divine individual took thousands of years to fully develop, and is still constantly
threatened by direct attack and insidious counter-movement. It is based upon realization that the individual
is the locus of experience. All that we can know about reality we know through experience. It is therefore
simplest to assume that all there is of reality is experience, in being and progressive unfolding.
Furthermore, it is the subjective aspect of individuality - of experience - that is divine, not the objective.
Man is an animal, from the objective viewpoint, worthy of no more consideration than the opinion and
opportunities of the moment dictate. From the mythic viewpoint, however, every individual is unique - is a
new set of experiences, a new universe; has been granted the ability to bring something new into being; is
capable of participating in the act of creation itself. It is the expression of this capacity for creative action
that makes the tragic conditions of life tolerable, bearable - remarkable, miraculous.
The paradise of childhood is absolute meaningful immersion. That immersion is a genuine manifestation
of subjective interest. Interest accompanies the honest pursuit of the unknown, in a direction and at a rate
subjectively determined. The unknown, in its beneficial guise, is the ground of interest, the source of what
matters. Culture, in its supportive role, extends the power with which the unknown can be met, by
disciplining the individual and expanding his range of ability. In childhood, the parent serves as cultural
surrogate, and the child explores under the umbrella of protection provided by his parents. The parental
mechanism has its limits, however, and must be superseded by the internalization of culture - by the
intrapsychic incorporation of belief, security, and goal. Adoption of this secondary protective structure
dramatically extends and shapes individual capability.
362 












The dragon limits the pursuit of individual interest. The struggle with the dragon - against the forces
that devour will and hope - constitutes the heroic battle, in the mythological world. Faithful adherence to
the reality of personal experience ensures contact with the dragon - and it is during such contact that the
great force of the individual spirit makes itself manifest, if it is allowed to. The hero voluntarily places
himself in opposition to the dragon. The liar pretends that the great danger does not exist, to his peril and to
that of others, or abdicates his relationship with his essential interest, and abandons all chance at further
development.
Interest is meaning. Meaning is manifestation of the divine individual adaptive path. The lie is
abandonment of individual interest - hence meaning, hence divinity - for safety and security; is sacrifice of
the individual to appease the Great Mother and Great Father.
The lie is fear's statement: "That could not really be the case; that did not really happen." The lie
weakens the individual - who no longer extends the range of his competence by testing his subjectivity
against the world - and drains his life of meaning. Life without meaning is mortal limitation; is subjection
to pain and suffering, without recourse. Life without meaning is tragedy, without hope of redemption.
The abandonment of meaning insures the adoption of a demonic mode of adaptation, because the
individual hates pointless pain and frustration and will work towards its destruction. This work constitutes
revenge against existence, rendered unbearable by pride.
Rebirth is re-establishment of interest, after adoption of culturally-determined competence. The rebirth
of interest moves the individual to the border between the known and the unknown and thereby expands
adaptive competence. In this manner, God acts through the individual, in the modern world, and extends
the domain of history.
Self-consciousness means knowledge of individual vulnerability. The process by which this knowledge
comes to be can destroy faith in individual worth. This means - in concrete terms - that an individual may
come to sacrifice his own experience, in the course of development, because its pursuit creates social
conflict, or exposes individual inadequacy. However, it is only through such conflict that change takes
place, and weakness must be recognized, before it can be transformed into strength. This means that the
sacrifice of individuality eliminates any possibility that individual strength can be discovered or developed,
and that the world itself might progress.
Individuals whose life is without meaning hate themselves, for their weakness, and hate life, for making
them weak. This hatred manifests itself in absolute identification with destructive power, in its
mythological, historical and biological manifestations; manifests itself in the desire for the absolute
extinction of existence. Such identification leads man to poison whatever he touches, to generate
unnecessary misery in the face of inevitable suffering, to turn his fellows against themselves, to intermingle
earth with hell - merely to attain vengeance upon God and his creation.
The human purpose, if such a thing can be considered, is to pursue meaning - to extend the domain of
light, of consciousness - in spite of limitation. A meaningful event exists on the boundary between order
and chaos. The pursuit of meaning exposes the individual to the unknown in gradual fashion, allowing him
to develop strength and adaptive ability in proportion to the seriousness of his pursuit. It is during contact
with the unknown that human power grows, individually and then historically. Meaning is the subjective
experience associated with that contact, in sufficient proportion. The great religious myths state that
continued pursuit of meaning, adopted voluntarily and without self-deception, will lead the individual to
discover his identity with God. This "revealed identity" will make him capable of withstanding the tragedy
of life. Abandonment of meaning, by contrast, reduces man to his mortal weaknesses. This makes him hate
life, and work towards its elimination.
Meaning is the most profound manifestation of instinct. Man is a creature attracted by the unknown; a
creature adapted for its conquest. The subjective sense of meaning is the instinct governing rate of contact
with the unknown. Too much exposure turns change to chaos; too little promotes stagnation and
degeneration. The appropriate balance produces a powerful individual, confident in the ability to withstand
life, ever more able to deal with nature and society, ever closer to the heroic ideal. Each individual,
constitutionally unique, finds meaning in different pursuits, if he has the courage to maintain his difference.
Manifestation of individual diversity, transformed into knowledge that can be transferred socially, changes
the face of history itself, and moves each generation of man farther into the unknown.
363 





Social and biological conditions define the boundaries of individual existence. The unfailing pursuit of
interest provides the subjective means by which these conditions can be met, and their boundaries
transcended. Meaning is the instinct that makes life possible. When it is abandoned, individuality loses its
redeeming power. The great lie is that meaning does not exist, or that it is not important. When meaning is
denied, hatred for life and the wish for its destruction inevitably rules.
"If you bring forth what is within you, what you bring forth will save you.

If you do not bring forth what is within you, what you do not bring forth will destroy you."667

The wisdom of the group can serve as the force that mediates between the dependency of childhood and the
responsibility of the adult. Under such circumstances, the past serves the present. A society predicated upon
belief in the paramount divinity of the individual allows personal interest to flourish and to serve as the
power that opposes the tyranny of culture and the terror of nature. The denial of meaning, by contrast,
ensures absolute identification with the group - or intrapsychic degeneration and decadence. The denial of
meaning makes the degenerate or absolutist individual desperate and weak, when the great maternal sea of
chaos threatens. This desperation and weakness makes him hate life, and to work for its devastation - in
him, as well as in those around him. The lie is the central act in this drama of corruption:
"These are the secret sayings which the living Jesus spoke and which Didymos Judas Thomas wrote
down.
And he said, 'Whoever finds the interpretation of these sayings will not experience death.'
Jesus said, 'Let him who seeks continue seeking until he finds. When he becomes troubled, he will be
astonished, and he will rule over the all.'
Jesus said, 'If those who lead you say to you, 'See, the kingdom is in the sky,' then the birds of the sky
will precede you. If they say to you, 'It is in the sea,' then the fish will precede you. Rather, the kingdom
is inside of you, and it is outside of you. When you come to know yourselves, then you will become
known, and you will realize that it is you who are the sons of the living father. But if you will not know
yourselves, you dwell in poverty and it is you who are that poverty.
Jesus said, 'The man old in days will not hesitate to ask a small child seven days old about the place of
life, and he will live. For many who are first will become last, and they will become one and the same.'
Jesus said, 'Recognize what is in your sight, and that which is hidden from you will become plain to
you. For there is nothing hidden which will not become manifest.'
His disciples questioned him and said to him, 'Do you want us to fast? How shall we pray? Shall we
give alms? What diet shall we observe?'
Jesus said, 'Do not tell lies, and do not do what you hate, for all things are plain in the sight of heaven.
For nothing hidden will not become manifest, and nothing covered will remain without being
uncovered.'"


RULE 1 

STAND UP STRAIGHT WITH YOUR SHOULDERS BACK 


LOBSTERS-AND TERRITORY 

If you are like most people, you don't often think about lobsters -unless you're eating 
one. However, these interesting and delicious crustaceans are very much worth 
considering. Their nervous systems are comparatively simple, with large, easily observable 
neurons, the magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to map the 
neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped us understand the structure 
and function of the brain and behaviour of more complex animals, including human 
beings. Lobsters have more in common with you than you might think (particularly when 
you are feeling crabby-ha ha). 

Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down there, a range within 
which they hunt for prey and scavenge around for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever 
rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want 
somewhere secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. 

This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What if two of them occupy 
the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean, at the same time, and both want to live 
there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a 
family, in the same crowded patch of sand and refuse? 

Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come north in the spring, for 
example, they engage in ferocious territorial disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful 
and beautiful to human ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical 
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren, for example, a small, 
feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North America. A newly arrived wren wants a 
sheltered place to build a nest, away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, 
and attractive to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that space to 
keep their distance. 

Birds-and Territory 

My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years old. It looked like a 
Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about the size of a quarter. This made it a 
good house for wrens, who are tiny, and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn't 
get in. My elderly neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same 
time, from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the size of a 
robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied. 

A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home there. We could hear 
his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over, during the early spring. Once he'd built 
his nest in the covered wagon, however, our new avian tenant started carrying small 
sticks to our neighbour's nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large or 
small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this pre-emptive strike, 
but there was nothing to be done about it. "If we take it down," said my dad, "clean it up, 
and put it back in the tree, the wren will just pack it full of sticks again." Wrens are small, 
and they're cute, but they're merciless. 

I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter-first time down the hill-and had 
received some money from a school insurance policy designed to reward unfortunate, 


23 


clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the 
proceeds. My dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren's song, play it 
back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring sunlight and taped a 
few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to his territory with song. Then I let him 
hear his own voice. That little bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb 
me and my cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker. We saw 
a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape recorder. If a larger bird 
ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees near our birdhouse there was a good chance 
he would get knocked off his perch by a kamikaze wren. 

Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly, sing or perch in trees. 
Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens can't breathe underwater, and are seldom 
served with butter. However, they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed 
with status and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian 
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe observed (back in 
1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a "pecking order." 

The determination of Who's Who in the chicken world has important implications for 
each individual bird's survival, particularly in times of scarcity. The birds that always have 
priority access to whatever food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the 
celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. 
Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down to the bedraggled, partially- 
feathered and badly-pecked wretches who occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the 
chicken hierarchy. 

Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as wrens, do not, but 
they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It's just spread out over more territory. The 
wiliest, strongest, healthiest and most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend 
it. Because of this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks 
who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to 
superior food, makes for a much less stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is 
little difference between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life and 
death. 

If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of well-stratified 
songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed birds, occupying the lowest rungs of 
the bird world, who are most likely to sicken and die. This is equally true of human 
neighbourhoods, when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The 
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are also much more 
susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer, diabetes and heart disease. When 
the aristocracy catches a cold, as it is said, the working class dies of pneumonia. 

Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always in short supply, 
territory-seeking among animals produces conflict. Conflict, in turn, produces another 
problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. 
This latter point is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble 
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate into outright physical 
combat. Under such circumstances, one bird, usually the largest, will eventually win-but 
even the victor may be hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny 
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled victor. That is not 
at all a good deal for the first two birds. 

Conflict-and Territory 

Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the same territories have in 
consequence learned many tricks to establish dominance, while risking the least amount 


24 


of possible damage. A defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its 
throat to the victor, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may 
still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one as pathetic as his now-defeated 
foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one 
another to indicate their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized 
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement to reduce potential 
conflict among dominant and subordinate group members. Such behavior is endemic in 
the community of living things. 

Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.- If you catch a few 
dozen, and transport them to a new location, you can observe their status-forming rituals 
and techniques. Each lobster will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its 
details, and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about where they 
live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one near its nest, it will quickly zip 
back and hide there. If you startle it some distance away, however, it will immediately 
dart towards the nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered. 

A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and the forces of nature. 
Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or shed their shells, which leaves them soft 
and vulnerable for extended periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster 
home, particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be dragged into place 
to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly ensconced inside. However, there may be 
only a small number of high-quality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They 
are scarce and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out. 

This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out exploring. Researchers 
have demonstrated that even a lobster raised in isolation knows what to do when such a 
thing happens. It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its 
nervous system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising its claws, 
moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its opponent, waving its opened 
claws back and forth. At the same time, it employs special jets under its eyes to direct 
streams of liquid at its opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell 
the other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood. 

Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of claw size that it is 
much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical 
information exchanged in the spray can have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or 
less aggressive lobster to retreat. That's dispute resolution Level 1. If the two lobsters 
are very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of liquid has been 
insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute resolution Level 2. With antennae 
whipping madly and claws folded downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. 
Then the defender will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this 
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing is not in his best 
interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck 
elsewhere. If neither blinks, however, the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves 
genuine combat. 

This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously, with their claws 
extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on its back. A successfully flipped lobster 
will conclude that its opponent is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives 
up and leaves (although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about the 
victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other-or if one will not quit despite 
being flipped-the lobsters move to Level 4. Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not 
something to be engaged in without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge 
damaged from the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally. 


25 


The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their claws are open, so 
they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or anything else exposed and vulnerable. 
Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, 
sharply, with claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have escalated 
to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The loser is unlikely to survive, 
particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal 
enemy. 

In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively a lobster has behaved, 
it becomes unwilling to fight further, even against another, previously defeated opponent. 
A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can 
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain 
basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate's brain-one more appropriate to its 
new, lowly position. Its original brain just isn't sophisticated to manage the 
transformation from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and 
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after a serious defeat in 
romance or career may feel some sense of kinship with the once successful crustacean. 

The Neurochemistry of Defeat and Victory 

A lobster loser's brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a lobster winner. This is 
reflected in their relative postures. Whether a lobster is confident or cringing depends on 
the ratio of two chemicals that modulate communication between lobster neurons: 
serotonin and octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter. 

A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, 
strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back down when challenged. This is because 
serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that 
it can look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western. When a 
lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it will stretch itself out, advance 
even on former victors, and fight longer and harder.- The drugs prescribed to depressed 
human beings, which are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same 
chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the 
evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even cheers up lobsters. 

High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The opposite neurochemical 
configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, 
scrunched-up, inhibited, drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around 
street corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also 
regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it 
needs to escape. Less provocation is necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. 
You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier or 
battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. 

The Principle of Unequal Distribution 

When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it is more likely to 
lose again than you would predict, statistically, from a tally of its previous fights. Its 
victorious opponent, on the other hand, is more likely to win. It's winner-take-all in the 
lobster world, just as it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot 
as the bottom 50 percent -and where the richest eighty-five people have as much as the 
bottom three and a half billion. 

That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside the financial domain 
-indeed, anywhere that creative production is required. The majority of scientific papers 


26 


are published by a very small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces 
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors sell all the books. A 
million and a half separately titled books (!) sell each year in the US. However, only five 
hundred of these sell more than a hundred thousand copies. Similarly, just four classical 
composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all the music played 
by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed so prolifically that it would take 
decades of work merely to hand-copy his scores, yet only a small fraction of this 
prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the 
other three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a small fraction of 
their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction of the music composed by a small 
fraction of all the classical composers who have ever composed makes up almost all the 
classical music that the world knows and loves. 

This principle is sometimes known as Price's law, after Derek J. de Solla Price, the 
researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an 
approximately L-shaped graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and 
productivity or resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much 
earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848-1923), an Italian polymath, noticed its applicability to 
wealth distribution in the early twentieth century, and it appears true for every society 
ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a 
very small number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a very small 
number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words in a language (90 percent of 
communication occurs using just 500 words), among many other things. Sometimes it is 
known as the Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the 
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: "to those who have everything, more will be 
given; from those who have nothing, everything will be taken." 

You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even to crustaceans. 

Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn't take that long before lobsters, testing each 
other out, learn who can be messed with and who should be given a wide berth-and 
once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to 
do, once he has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a previous 
opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker lobster will quit trying, 
accept his lowly status, and keep his legs attached to his body. The top lobster, by 
contrast-occupying the best shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal- 
parades his dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from their 
shelters at night, just to remind them who's their daddy. 

All the Girls 

The female lobsters (who also fight hard for territory during the explicitly maternal stages 
of their existence ) identify the top guy quickly, and become irresistibly attracted to him. 
This is brilliant strategy, in my estimation. It's also one used by females of many different 
species, including humans. Instead of undertaking the computationally difficult task of 
identifying the best man, the females outsource the problem to the machine-like 
calculations of the dominance hierarchy. They let the males fight it out and peel their 
paramours from the top. This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, 
where the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all. 

When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a bit, they become 
interested in mating. They start hanging around the dominant lobster's pad, spraying 
attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has 
made him successful, so he's likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner. Furthermore, 
he's large, healthy and powerful. It's no easy task to switch his attention from fighting to 


27 


mating. (If properly charmed, however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. 
This is the lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback of all 
time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of archetypal romance. This is the pattern 
of behaviour continually represented in the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as 
popular among women as provocative images of naked women are among men.) 

It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an unstable basis on 
which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch primatologist Frans de Waal has taken 
pains to demonstrate. Among the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful 
in the longer term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated 
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down, after all, by two 
opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer 
are those who form reciprocal coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay 
careful attention to the troupe's females and their infants. The political ploy of baby- 
kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still comparatively primitive, so 
the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty suffice for them. 

Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful female (lobster) will 
disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to 
mate. At the right moment, the male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a 
packet of sperm into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and 
hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely unknown among 
human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. 
At this point another female will attempt the same thing-and so on. The dominant male, 
with his upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and easiest 
access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls. It is exponentially more 
worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male. 

Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart from those that are 
comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters have been around, in one form or another, 
for more than 350 million years. This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, 
there were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To the lobsters, 
however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared and disappeared in the flow of 
near-eternal time. This means that dominance hierarchies have been an essentially 
permanent feature of the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a 
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively simple. Nonetheless, 
they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information 
about status and society. The importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. 

The Nature of Nature 

It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something evolves, it must 
build upon what nature has already produced. New features may be added, and old 
features may undergo some alteration, but most things remain the same. It is for this 
reason that the wings of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look 
astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number of bones. 
Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology long ago. 

Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural selection. Variation 
exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling (to put it simply) and random mutation. 
Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, 
across time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual alteration of life- 
forms over the eons. But there's an additional question lurking under the surface: what 
exactly is the "nature" in "natural selection"? What exactly is "the environment" to which 
animals adapt? We make many assumptions about nature-about the environment-and 


28 


these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, "It's not what we don't know that gets 
us in trouble. It's what we know for sure that just ain't so." 

First, it is easy to assume that "nature" is something with a nature-something static. 
But it's not: at least not in any simple sense. It's static and dynamic, at the same time. 
The environment-the nature that selects-itself transforms. The famous yin and yang 
symbols of the Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists-reality itself-is 
composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine and masculine, or even 
more narrowly as female and male. However, yin and yang are more accurately 
understood as chaos and order. The Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, 
head to tail. The black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent, 
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are interchangeable, as 
well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun 
itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be 
fixed. Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously, a 
metamorphosis. 

Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of apprehension. Nature 
"selects." The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is 
"fitness" that is "selected." Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given 
organism will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The "fit" in 
"fitness" is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If 
that demand is conceptualized as static-if nature is conceptualized as eternal and 
unchanging-then evolution is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness 
is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful 
Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the pinnacle, is a partial consequence 
of this model of nature. It produces the erroneous notion that there is a destination of 
natural selection (increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be 
conceptualized as a fixed point. 

But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector-not in any simple sense. Nature 
dresses differently for each occasion. Nature varies like a musical score-and that, in part, 
explains why music produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment 
supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a given individual 
successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of 
natural selection does not posit creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a 
template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature, albeit 
one that is deadly. "In my kingdom," as the Red Queen tells Alice in Wonderland, "you 
have to run as fast as you can just to stay in the same place." No one standing still can 
triumph, no matter how well constituted. 

Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly, but they are nested 
within other things that change less quickly (music frequently models this, too). Leaves 
change more quickly than trees, and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes 
faster than climate. If it wasn't this way, then the conservatism of evolution would not 
work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to change as fast as the 
length of arm bones and the function of fingers. It's chaos, within order, within chaos, 
within higher order. The order that is most real is the order that is most unchanging- 
and that is not necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived, 
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the forest. And some 
things that are most real (such as the ever-present dominance hierarchy) cannot be 
"seen" at all. 

It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich, modern city-dwellers, 
surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine the environment as something pristine and 
paradisal, like a French impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in 


29 



their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect, absent the 
disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately, "the environment" is also 
elephantiasis and guinea worms (don't ask), anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, 
starvation-level droughts, AIDS and the Black Plague. We don't fantasize about the 
beauty of these aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic 
counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that we attempt to 
modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation 
systems and growing food and generating power. If Mother Nature wasn't so hell-bent on 
our destruction, it would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates. 

And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is something strictly 
segregated from the cultural constructs that have emerged within it. The order within the 
chaos and order of Being is all the more "natural" the longer it has lasted. This is because 
"nature" is "what selects," and the longer a feature has existed the more time it has had 
to be selected-and to shape life. It does not matter whether that feature is physical and 
biological, or social and cultural. All that matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is 
permanence-and the dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, 
has been around for some half a billion years. It's permanent. It's real. The dominance 
hierarchy is not capitalism. It's not communism, either, for that matter. It's not the 
military-industrial complex. It's not the patriarchy-that disposable, malleable, arbitrary 
cultural artefact. It's not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is 
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what is blamed on these 
more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence of its unchanging existence. We (the 
sovereign we, the we that has been around since the beginning of life) have lived in a 
dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. We were struggling for position before we had 
skin, or hands, or lungs, or bones. There is little more natural than culture. Dominance 
hierarchies are older than trees. 

The part of our brain that keeps track of our position in the dominance hierarchy is 
therefore exceptionally ancient and fundamental. It is a master control system, 
modulating our perceptions, values, emotions, thoughts and actions. It powerfully affects 
every aspect of our Being, conscious and unconscious alike. This is why, when we are 
defeated, we act very much like lobsters who have lost a fight. Our posture droops. We 
face the ground. We feel threatened, hurt, anxious and weak. If things do not improve, we 
become chronically depressed. Under such conditions, we can't easily put up the kind of 
fight that life demands, and we become easy targets for harder-shelled bullies. And it is 
not only the behavioural and experiential similarities that are striking. Much of the basic 
neurochemistry is the same. 

Consider serotonin, the chemical that governs posture and escape in the lobster. Low- 
ranking lobsters produce comparatively low levels of serotonin. This is also true of low- 
ranking human beings (and those low levels decrease more with each defeat). Low 
serotonin means decreased confidence. Low serotonin means more response to stress and 
costlier physical preparedness for emergency-as anything whatsoever may happen, at 
any time, at the bottom of the dominance hierarchy (and rarely something good). Low 
serotonin means less happiness, more pain and anxiety, more illness, and a shorter 
lifespan-among humans, just as among crustaceans. Higher spots in the dominance 
hierarchy, and the higher serotonin levels typical of those who inhabit them, are 
characterized by less illness, misery and death, even when factors such as absolute income 
-or number of decaying food scraps-are held constant. The importance of this can 
hardly be overstated. 

Top and Bottom 


30 


There is an unspeakably primordial calculator, deep within you, at the very foundation of 
your brain, far below your thoughts and feelings. It monitors exactly where you are 
positioned in society-on a scale of one to ten, for the sake of argument. If you're a 
number one, the highest level of status, you're an overwhelming success. If you're male, 
you have preferential access to the best places to live and the highest-quality food. People 
compete to do you favours. You have limitless opportunity for romantic and sexual 
contact. You are a successful lobster, and the most desirable females line up and vie for 
your attention. 

If you're female, you have access to many high-quality suitors: tall, strong and 
symmetrical; creative, reliable, honest and generous. And, like your dominant male 
counterpart, you will compete ferociously, even pitilessly, to maintain or improve your 
position in the equally competitive female mating hierarchy. Although you are less likely 
to use physical aggression to do so, there are many effective verbal tricks and strategies at 
your disposal, including the disparaging of opponents, and you may well be expert at their 
use. 

If you are a low-status ten, by contrast, male or female, you have nowhere to live (or 
nowhere good). Your food is terrible, when you're not going hungry. You're in poor 
physical and mental condition. You're of minimal romantic interest to anyone, unless 
they are as desperate as you. You are more likely to fall ill, age rapidly, and die young, 
with few, if any, to mourn you. Even money itself may prove of little use. You won't 
know how to use it, because it is difficult to use money properly, particularly if you are 
unfamiliar with it. Money will make you liable to the dangerous temptations of drugs and 
alcohol, which are much more rewarding if you have been deprived of pleasure for a long 
period. Money will also make you a target for predators and psychopaths, who thrive on 
exploiting those who exist on the lower rungs of society. The bottom of the dominance 
hierarchy is a terrible, dangerous place to be. 

The ancient part of your brain specialized for assessing dominance watches how you are 
treated by other people. On that evidence, it renders a determination of your value and 
assigns you a status. If you are judged by your peers as of little worth, the counter 
restricts serotonin availability. That makes you much more physically and psychologically 
reactive to any circumstance or event that might produce emotion, particularly if it is 
negative. You need that reactivity. Emergencies are common at the bottom, and you must 
be ready to survive. 

Unfortunately, that physical hyper-response, that constant alertness, burns up a lot of 
precious energy and physical resources. This response is really what everyone calls stress, 
and it is by no means only or even primarily psychological. It's a reflection of the genuine 
constraints of unfortunate circumstances. When operating at the bottom, the ancient 
brain counter assumes that even the smallest unexpected impediment might produce an 
uncontrollable chain of negative events, which will have to be handled alone, as useful 
friends are rare indeed, on society's fringes. You will therefore continually sacrifice what 
you could otherwise physically store for the future, using it up on heightened readiness 
and the possibility of immediate panicked action in the present. When you don't know 
what to do, you must be prepared to do anything and everything, in case it becomes 
necessary. You're sitting in your car with the gas and brake pedals both punched to the 
mat. Too much of that and everything falls apart. The ancient counter will even shut 
down your immune system, expending the energy and resources required for future 
health now, during the crises of the present. It will render you impulsive,- 1 so that you 
will jump, for example, at any short-term mating opportunities, or any possibilities of 
pleasure, no matter how sub-par, disgraceful or illegal. It will leave you far more likely to 
live, or die, carelessly, for a rare opportunity at pleasure, when it manifests itself. The 
physical demands of emergency preparedness will wear you down in every way. 


31 


If you have a high status, on the other hand, the counter's cold, pre-reptilian mechanics 
assume that your niche is secure, productive and safe, and that you are well buttressed 
with social support. It thinks the chance that something will damage you is low and can 
be safely discounted. Change might be opportunity, instead of disaster. The serotonin 
flows plentifully. This renders you confident and calm, standing tall and straight, and 
much less on constant alert. Because your position is secure, the future is likely to be 
good for you. It's worthwhile to think in the long term and plan for a better tomorrow. 
You don't need to grasp impulsively at whatever crumbs come your way, because you can 
realistically expect good things to remain available. You can delay gratification, without 
forgoing it forever. You can afford to be a reliable and thoughtful citizen. 

Malfunction 

Sometimes, however, the counter mechanism can go wrong. Erratic habits of sleeping and 
eating can interfere with its function. Uncertainty can throw it for a loop. The body, with 
its various parts, needs to function like a well-rehearsed orchestra. Every system must 
play its role properly, and at exactly the right time, or noise and chaos ensue. It is for this 
reason that routine is so necessary. The acts of life we repeat every day need to be 
automatized. They must be turned into stable and reliable habits, so they lose their 
complexity and gain predictability and simplicity. This can be perceived most clearly in 
the case of small children, who are delightful and comical and playful when their sleeping 
and eating schedules are stable, and horrible and whiny and nasty when they are not. 

It is for such reasons that I always ask my clinical clients first about sleep. Do they 
wake up in the morning at approximately the time the typical person wakes up, and at the 
same time every day? If the answer is no, fixing that is the first thing I recommend. It 
doesn't matter so much if they go to bed at the same time each evening, but waking up at 
a consistent hour is a necessity. Anxiety and depression cannot be easily treated if the 
sufferer has unpredictable daily routines. The systems that mediate negative emotion are 
tightly tied to the properly cyclical circadian rhythms. 

The next thing I ask about is breakfast. I counsel my clients to eat a fat and protein- 
heavy breakfast as soon as possible after they awaken (no simple carbohydrates, no 
sugars, as they are digested too rapidly, and produce a blood-sugar spike and rapid dip). 
This is because anxious and depressed people are already stressed, particularly if their 
lives have not been under control for a good while. Their bodies are therefore primed to 
hypersecrete insulin, if they engage in any complex or demanding activity. If they do so 
after fasting all night and before eating, the excess insulin in their bloodstream will mop 
up all their blood sugar. Then they become hypoglycemic and psycho-physiologically 
unstable. All day. Their systems cannot be reset until after more sleep. I have had many 
clients whose anxiety was reduced to subclinical levels merely because they started to 
sleep on a predictable schedule and eat breakfast. 

Other bad habits can also interfere with the counter's accuracy. Sometimes this 
happens directly, for poorly understood biological reasons, and sometimes it happens 
because those habits initiate a complex positive feedback loop. A positive feedback loop 
requires an input detector, an amplifier, and some form of output. Imagine a signal picked 
up by the input detector, amplified, and then emitted, in amplified form. So far, so good. 
The trouble starts when the input detector detects that output, and runs it through the 
system again, amplifying and emitting it again. A few rounds of intensification and things 
get dangerously out of control. 

Most people have been subject to the deafening howling of feedback at a concert, when 
the sound system squeals painfully. The microphone sends a signal to the speakers. The 
speakers emit the signal. The signal can be picked up by the microphone and sent through 


32 


the system again, if it's too loud or too close to the speakers. The sound rapidly amplifies 
to unbearable levels, sufficient to destroy the speakers, if it continues. 

The same destructive loop happens within people's lives. Much of the time, when it 
happens, we label it mental illness, even though it's not only or even at all occurring 
inside people's psyches. Addiction to alcohol or another mood-altering drug is a common 
positive-feedback process. Imagine a person who enjoys alcohol, perhaps a bit too much. 
He has a quick three or four drinks. His blood alcohol level spikes sharply. This can be 
extremely exhilarating, particularly for someone who has a genetic predisposition to 
alcoholism.- But it only occurs while blood alcohol levels are actively rising, and that 
only continues if the drinker keeps drinking. When he stops, not only does his blood 
alcohol level plateau and then start to sink, but his body begins to produce a variety of 
toxins, as it metabolizes the ethanol already consumed. He also starts to experience 
alcohol withdrawal, as the anxiety systems that were suppressed during intoxication start 
to hyper-respond. A hangover is alcohol withdrawal (which quite frequently kills 
withdrawing alcoholics), and it starts all too soon after drinking ceases. To continue the 
warm glow, and stave off the unpleasant aftermath, the drinker may just continue to 
drink, until all the liquor in his house is consumed, the bars are closed and his money is 
spent. 

The next day, the drinker wakes up, badly hungover. So far, this is just unfortunate. 
The real trouble starts when he discovers that his hangover can be "cured" with a few 
more drinks the morning after. Such a cure is, of course, temporary. It merely pushes the 
withdrawal symptoms a bit further into the future. But that might be what is required, in 
the short term, if the misery is sufficiently acute. So now he has learned to drink to cure 
his hangover. When the medication causes the disease, a positive feedback loop has been 
established. Alcoholism can quickly emerge under such conditions. 

Something similar often happens to people who develop an anxiety disorder, such as 
agoraphobia. People with agoraphobia can become so overwhelmed with fear that they 
will no longer leave their homes. Agoraphobia is the consequence of a positive feedback 
loop. The first event that precipitates the disorder is often a panic attack. The sufferer is 
typically a middle-aged woman who has been too dependent on other people. Perhaps she 
went immediately from over-reliance on her father to a relationship with an older and 
comparatively dominant boyfriend or husband, with little or no break for independent 
existence. 

In the weeks leading up to the emergence of her agoraphobia, such a woman typically 
experiences something unexpected and anomalous. It might be something physiological, 
such as heart palpitations, which are common in any case, and whose likelihood is 
increased during menopause, when the hormonal processes regulating a women's 
psychological experience fluctuate unpredictably. Any perceptible alteration in heart-rate 
can trigger thoughts both of heart attack and an all-too-public and embarrassing display 
of post-heart attack distress and suffering (death and social humiliation constituting the 
two most basic fears). The unexpected occurrence might instead be conflict in the 
sufferer's marriage, or the illness or death of a spouse. It might be a close friend's divorce 
or hospitalization. Some real event typically precipitates the initial increase in fear of 
mortality and social judgment. 

After the shock, perhaps, the pre-agoraphobic woman leaves her house, and makes her 
way to the shopping mall. It's busy and difficult to park. This makes her even more 
stressed. The thoughts of vulnerability occupying her mind since her recent unpleasant 
experience rise close to the surface. They trigger anxiety. Her heart rate rises. She begins 
to breathe shallowly and quickly. She feels her heart racing and begins to wonder if she is 
suffering a heart attack. This thought triggers more anxiety. She breathes even more 


33 


shallowly, increasing the levels of carbon dioxide in her blood. Her heart rate increases 
again, because of her additional fear. She detects that, and her heart rate rises again. 

Poof! Positive feedback loop. Soon the anxiety transforms into panic, regulated by a 
different brain system, designed for the severest of threats, which can be triggered by too 
much fear. She is overwhelmed by her symptoms, and heads for the emergency room, 
where after an anxious wait her heart function is checked. There is nothing wrong. But 
she is not reassured. 

It takes an additional feedback loop to transform even that unpleasant experience into 
full-blown agoraphobia. The next time she needs to go to the mall, the pre-agoraphobic 
becomes anxious, remembering what happened last time. But she goes, anyway. On the 
way, she can feel her heart pounding. That triggers another cycle of anxiety and concern. 
To forestall panic, she avoids the stress of the mall and returns home. But now the 
anxiety systems in her brain note that she ran away from the mall, and conclude that the 
journey there was truly dangerous. Our anxiety systems are very practical. They assume 
that anything you run away from is dangerous. The proof of that is, of course, the fact you 
ran away. 

So now the mall is tagged "too dangerous to approach" (or the budding agoraphobic 
has labelled herself, "too fragile to approach the mall"). Perhaps that is not yet taking 
things far enough to cause her real trouble. There are other places to shop. But maybe the 
nearby supermarket is mall-like enough to trigger a similar response, when she visits it 
instead, and then retreats. Now the supermarket occupies the same category. Then it's 
the corner store. Then it's buses and taxis and subways. Soon it's everywhere. The 
agoraphobic will even eventually become afraid of her house, and would run away from 
that if she could. But she can't. Soon she's stuck in her home. Anxiety-induced retreat 
makes everything retreated from more anxiety-inducing. Anxiety-induced retreat makes 
the self smaller and the ever-more-dangerous world larger. 

There are many systems of interaction between brain, body and social world that can 
get caught in positive feedback loops. Depressed people, for example, can start feeling 
useless and burdensome, as well as grief-stricken and pained. This makes them withdraw 
from contact with friends and family. Then the withdrawal makes them more lonesome 
and isolated, and more likely to feel useless and burdensome. Then they withdraw more. 
In this manner, depression spirals and amplifies. 

If someone is badly hurt at some point in life-traumatized-the dominance counter 
can transform in a manner that makes additional hurt more rather than less likely. This 
often happens in the case of people, now adults, who were viciously bullied during 
childhood or adolescence. They become anxious and easily upset. They shield themselves 
with a defensive crouch, and avoid the direct eye contact interpretable as a dominance 
challenge. 

This means that the damage caused by the bullying (the lowering of status and 
confidence) can continue, even after the bullying has ended.- In the simplest of cases, 
the formerly lowly persons have matured and moved to new and more successful places in 
their lives. But they don't fully notice. Their now-counterproductive physiological 
adaptations to earlier reality remain, and they are more stressed and uncertain than is 
necessary. In more complex cases, a habitual assumption of subordination renders the 
person more stressed and uncertain than necessary, and their habitually submissive 
posturing continues to attract genuine negative attention from one or more of the fewer 
and generally less successful bullies still extant in the adult world. In such situations, the 
psychological consequence of the previous bullying increases the likelihood of continued 
bullying in the present (even though, strictly speaking, it wouldn't have to, because of 
maturation, or geographical relocation, or continued education, or improvement in 
objective status). 


34 


Rising Up 

Sometimes people are bullied because they can't fight back. This can happen to people 
who are weaker, physically, than their opponents. This is one of the most common 
reasons for the bullying experienced by children. Even the toughest of six-year-olds is no 
match for someone who is nine. A lot of that power differential disappears in adulthood, 
however, with the rough stabilization and matching of physical size (with the exception 
of that pertaining to men and women, with the former typically larger and stronger, 
particularly in the upper body) as well as the increased penalties generally applied in 
adulthood to those who insist upon continuing with physical intimidation. 

But just as often, people are bullied because they won't fight back. This happens not 
infrequently to people who are by temperament compassionate and self-sacrificing- 
particularly if they are also high in negative emotion, and make a lot of gratifying noises 
of suffering when someone sadistic confronts them (children who cry more easily, for 
example, are more frequently bullied). It also happens to people who have decided, for 
one reason or another, that all forms of aggression, including even feelings of anger, are 
morally wrong. I have seen people with a particularly acute sensitivity to petty tyranny 
and over-aggressive competitiveness restrict within themselves all the emotions that 
might give rise to such things. Often they are people whose fathers who were excessively 
angry and controlling. Psychological forces are never unidimensional in their value, 
however, and the truly appalling potential of anger and aggression to produce cruelty and 
mayhem are balanced by the ability of those primordial forces to push back against 
oppression, speak truth, and motivate resolute movement forward in times of strife, 
uncertainty and danger. 

With their capacity for aggression strait-jacketed within a too-narrow morality, those 
who are only or merely compassionate and self-sacrificing (and naive and exploitable) 
cannot call forth the genuinely righteous and appropriately self-protective anger necessary 
to defend themselves. If you can bite, you generally don't have to. When skillfully 
integrated, the ability to respond with aggression and violence decreases rather than 
increases the probability that actual aggression will become necessary. If you say no, early 
in the cycle of oppression, and you mean what you say (which means you state your 
refusal in no uncertain terms and stand behind it) then the scope for oppression on the 
part of oppressor will remain properly bounded and limited. The forces of tyranny expand 
inexorably to fill the space made available for their existence. People who refuse to 
muster appropriately self-protective territorial responses are laid open to exploitation as 
much as those who genuinely can't stand up for their own rights because of a more 
essential inability or a true imbalance in power. 

Naive, harmless people usually guide their perceptions and actions with a few simple 
axioms: people are basically good; no one really wants to hurt anyone else; the threat 
(and, certainly, the use) of force, physical or otherwise, is wrong. These axioms collapse, 
or worse, in the presence of individuals who are genuinely malevolent. Worse means 
that naive beliefs can become a positive invitation to abuse, because those who aim to 
harm have become specialized to prey on people who think precisely such things. Under 
such conditions, the axioms of harmlessness must be retooled. In my clinical practice I 
often draw the attention of my clients who think that good people never become angry to 
the stark realities of their own resentments. 

No one likes to be pushed around, but people often put up with it for too long. So, I get 
them to see their resentment, first, as anger, and then as an indication that something 
needs to be said, if not done (not least because honesty demands it). Then I get them to 
see such action as part of the force that holds tyranny at bay-at the social level, as much 
as the individual. Many bureaucracies have petty authoritarians within them, generating 
unnecessary rules and procedures simply to express and cement power. Such people 


35 


produce powerful undercurrents of resentment around them which, if expressed, would 
limit their expression of pathological power. It is in this manner that the willingness of 
the individual to stand up for him or herself protects everyone from the corruption of 
society. 

When naive people discover the capacity for anger within themselves, they are shocked, 
sometimes severely. A profound example of that can be found in the susceptibility of new 
soldiers to post-traumatic stress disorder, which often occurs because of something they 
watch themselves doing, rather than because of something that has happened to them. 
They react like the monsters they can truly be in extreme battlefield conditions, and the 
revelation of that capacity undoes their world. And no wonder. Perhaps they assumed 
that all of history's terrible perpetrators were people totally unlike themselves. Perhaps 
they were never able to see within themselves the capacity for oppression and bullying 
(and perhaps not their capacity for assertion and success, as well). I have had clients who 
were terrified into literally years of daily hysterical convulsions by the sheer look of 
malevolence on their attackers' faces. Such individuals typically come from hyper- 
sheltered families, where nothing terrible is allowed to exist, and everything is fairyland 
wonderful (or else). 

When the wakening occurs-when once-na'ive people recognize in themselves the seeds 
of evil and monstrosity, and see themselves as dangerous (at least potentially) their fear 
decreases. They develop more self-respect. Then, perhaps, they begin to resist oppression. 
They see that they have the ability to withstand, because they are terrible too. They see 
they can and must stand up, because they begin to understand how genuinely monstrous 
they will become, otherwise, feeding on their resentment, transforming it into the most 
destructive of wishes. To say it again: There is very little difference between the capacity 
for mayhem and destruction, integrated, and strength of character. This is one of the most 
difficult lessons of life. 

Maybe you are a loser. And maybe you're not-but if you are, you don't have to 
continue in that mode. Maybe you just have a bad habit. Maybe you're even just a 
collection of bad habits. Nonetheless, even if you came by your poor posture honestly- 
even if you were unpopular or bullied at home or in grade school -it's not necessarily 
appropriate now. Circumstances change. If you slump around, with the same bearing that 
characterizes a defeated lobster, people will assign you a lower status, and the old counter 
that you share with crustaceans, sitting at the very base of your brain, will assign you a 
low dominance number. Then your brain will not produce as much serotonin. This will 
make you less happy, and more anxious and sad, and more likely to back down when you 
should stand up for yourself. It will also decrease the probability that you will get to live 
in a good neighbourhood, have access to the highest quality resources, and obtain a 
healthy, desirable mate. It will render you more likely to abuse cocaine and alcohol, as 
you live for the present in a world full of uncertain futures. It will increase your 
susceptibility to heart disease, cancer and dementia. All in all, it's just not good. 

Circumstances change, and so can you. Positive feedback loops, adding effect to effect, 
can spiral counterproductively in a negative direction, but can also work to get you ahead. 
That's the other, far more optimistic lesson of Price's law and the Pareto distribution: 
those who start to have will probably get more. Some of these upwardly moving loops can 
occur in your own private, subjective space. Alterations in body language offer an 
important example. If you are asked by a researcher to move your facial muscles, one at a 
time, into a position that would look sad to an observer, you will report feeling sadder. If 
you are asked to move the muscles one by one into a position that looks happy, you will 
report feeling happier. Emotion is partly bodily expression, and can be amplified (or 
dampened) by that expression. 


36 


Some of the positive feedback loops instantiated by body language can occur beyond the 
private confines of subjective experience, in the social space you share with other people. 
If your posture is poor, for example-if you slump, shoulders forward and rounded, chest 
tucked in, head down, looking small, defeated and ineffectual (protected, in theory, 
against attack from behind)-then you will feel small, defeated and ineffectual. The 
reactions of others will amplify that. People, like lobsters, size each other up, partly in 
consequence of stance. If you present yourself as defeated, then people will react to you as 
if you are losing. If you start to straighten up, then people will look at and treat you 
differently. 

You might object: the bottom is real. Being at the bottom is equally real. A mere 
transformation of posture is insufficient to change anything that fixed. If you're in 
number ten position, then standing up straight and appearing dominant might only 
attract the attention of those who want, once again, to put you down. And fair enough. 
But standing up straight with your shoulders back is not something that is only physical, 
because you're not only a body. You're a spirit, so to speak-a psyche-as well. Standing 
up physically also implies and invokes and demands standing up metaphysically. Standing 
up means voluntarily accepting the burden of Being. Your nervous system responds in an 
entirely different manner when you face the demands of life voluntarily. You respond to a 
challenge, instead of bracing for a catastrophe. You see the gold the dragon hoards, 
instead of shrinking in terror from the all-too-real fact of the dragon. You step forward to 
take your place in the dominance hierarchy, and occupy your territory, manifesting your 
willingness to defend, expand and transform it. That can all occur practically or 
symbolically, as a physical or as a conceptual restructuring. 

To stand up straight with your shoulders back is to accept the terrible responsibility of 
life, with eyes wide open. It means deciding to voluntarily transform the chaos of 
potential into the realities of habitable order. It means adopting the burden of self- 
conscious vulnerability, and accepting the end of the unconscious paradise of childhood, 
where finitude and mortality are only dimly comprehended. It means willingly 
undertaking the sacrifices necessary to generate a productive and meaningful reality (it 
means acting to please God, in the ancient language). 

To stand up straight with your shoulders back means building the ark that protects the 
world from the flood, guiding your people through the desert after they have escaped 
tyranny, making your way away from comfortable home and country, and speaking the 
prophetic word to those who ignore the widows and children. It means shouldering the 
cross that marks the X, the place where you and Being intersect so terribly. It means 
casting dead, rigid and too tyrannical order back into the chaos in which it was generated; 
it means withstanding the ensuing uncertainty, and establishing, in consequence, a better, 
more meaningful and more productive order. 

So, attend carefully to your posture. Quit drooping and hunching around. Speak your 
mind. Put your desires forward, as if you had a right to them-at least the same right as 
others. Walk tall and gaze forthrightly ahead. Dare to be dangerous. Encourage the 
serotonin to flow plentifully through the neural pathways desperate for its calming 
influence. 

People, including yourself, will start to assume that you are competent and able (or at 
least they will not immediately conclude the reverse). Emboldened by the positive 
responses you are now receiving, you will begin to be less anxious. You will then find it 
easier to pay attention to the subtle social clues that people exchange when they are 
communicating. Your conversations will flow better, with fewer awkward pauses. This 
will make you more likely to meet people, interact with them, and impress them. Doing 
so will not only genuinely increase the probability that good things will happen to you-it 
will also make those good things feel better when they do happen. 


37 



Thus strengthened and emboldened, you may choose to embrace Being, and work for 
its furtherance and improvement. Thus strengthened, you may be able to stand, even 
during the illness of a loved one, even during the death of a parent, and allow others to 
find strength alongside you when they would otherwise be overwhelmed with despair. 
Thus emboldened, you will embark on the voyage of your life, let your light shine, so to 
speak, on the heavenly hill, and pursue your rightful destiny. Then the meaning of your 
life may be sufficient to keep the corrupting influence of mortal despair at bay. 

Then you may be able to accept the terrible burden of the World, and find joy. 

Look for your inspiration to the victorious lobster, with its 350 million years of 
practical wisdom. Stand up straight, with your shoulders back. 


38 



/** 

VS 


39 





40 
























a 


41 


RULE 2 


TREAT YOURSELF LIKE SOMEONE YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE 

FOR HELPING 


WHY WON'T YOU JUST TAKE YOUR DAMN PILLS? 

Imagine that a hundred people are prescribed a drug. Consider what happens next. One- 
third of them won't fill the prescription. Half of the remaining sixty-seven will fill it, but 
won't take the medication correctly. They'll miss doses. They'll quit taking it early. They 
might not even take it at all. 

Physicians and pharmacists tend to blame such patients for their noncompliance, 
inaction and error. You can lead a horse to water, they reason. Psychologists tend to take 
a dim view of such judgments. We are trained to assume that the failure of patients to 
follow professional advice is the fault of the practitioner, not the patient. We believe the 
health-care provider has a responsibility to profer advice that will be followed, offer 
interventions that will be respected, plan with the patient or client until the desired result 
is achieved, and follow up to ensure that everything is going correctly. This is just one of 
the many things that make psychologists so wonderful - :). Of course, we have the luxury 
of time with our clients, unlike other more beleaguered professionals, who wonder why 
sick people won't take their medication. What's wrong with them? Don't they want to get 
better? 

Here's something worse. Imagine that someone receives an organ transplant. Imagine 
it's a kidney. A transplant typically occurs only after a long period of anxious waiting on 
the part of the recipient. Only a minority of people donate organs when they die (and 
even fewer when they are still alive). Only a small number of donated organs are a good 
match for any hopeful recipient. This means that the typical kidney transplantee has been 
undergoing dialysis, the only alternative, for years. Dialysis involves passing all the 
patient's blood out of his or her body, through a machine, and back in. It is an unlikely 
and miraculous treatment, so that's all good, but it's not pleasant. It must happen five to 
seven times a week, for eight hours a time. It should happen every time the patient 
sleeps. That's too much. No one wants to stay on dialysis. 

Now, one of the complications of transplantation is rejection. Your body does not like it 
when parts of someone else's body are stitched into it. Your immune system will attack 
and destroy such foreign elements, even when they are crucial to your survival. To stop 
this from happening, you must take anti-rejection drugs, which weaken immunity, 
increasing your susceptibility to infectious disease. Most people are happy to accept the 
trade-off. Recipients of transplants still suffer the effects of organ rejection, despite the 
existence and utility of these drugs. It's not because the drugs fail (although they 
sometimes do). It's more often because those prescribed the drugs do not take them. This 
beggars belief. It is seriously not good to have your kidneys fail. Dialysis is no picnic. 
Transplantation surgery occurs after long waiting, at high risk and great expense. To lose 
all that because you don't take your medication? How could people do that to 
themselves? How could this possibly be? 

It's complicated, to be fair. Many people who receive a transplanted organ are isolated, 
or beset by multiple physical health problems (to say nothing of problems associated with 
unemployment or family crisis). They may be cognitively impaired or depressed. They 
may not entirely trust their doctor, or understand the necessity of the medication. Maybe 
they can barely afford the drugs, and ration them, desperately and unproductively. 


42 


But-and this is the amazing thing-imagine that it isn't you who feels sick. It's your 
dog. So, you take him to the vet. The vet gives you a prescription. What happens then? 
You have just as many reasons to distrust a vet as a doctor. Furthermore, if you cared so 
little for your pet that you weren't concerned with what improper, substandard or error- 
ridden prescription he might be given, you wouldn't have taken him to the vet in the first 
place. Thus, you care. Your actions prove it. In fact, on average, you care more. People are 
better at filling and properly administering prescription medication to their pets than to 
themselves. That's not good. Even from your pet's perspective, it's not good. Your pet 
(probably) loves you, and would be happier if you took your medication. 

It is difficult to conclude anything from this set of facts except that people appear to 
love their dogs, cats, ferrets and birds (and maybe even their lizards) more than 
themselves. How horrible is that? How much shame must exist, for something like that 
to be true? What could it be about people that makes them prefer their pets to 
themselves? 

It was an ancient story in the Book of Genesis-the first book in the Old Testament- 
that helped me find an answer to that perplexing question. 

The Oldest Story and the Nature of the World 

Two stories of Creation from two different Middle Eastern sources appear to be woven 
together in the Genesis account. In the chronologically first but historically more recent 
account-known as the "Priestly"-God created the cosmos, using His divine Word, 
speaking light, water and land into existence, following that with the plants and the 
heavenly bodies. Then He created birds and animals and fish (again, employing speech) - 
and ended with man, male and female, both somehow formed in his image. That all 
happens in Genesis 1. In the second, older, "Jawhist" version, we find another origin 
account, involving Adam and Eve (where the details of creation differ somewhat), as well 
as the stories of Cain and Abel, Noah and the Tower of Babel. That is Genesis 2 to 11. To 
understand Genesis 1, the Priestly story, with its insistence on speech as the fundamental 
creative force, it is first necessary to review a few fundamental, ancient assumptions 
(these are markedly different in type and intent from the assumptions of science, which 
are, historically speaking, quite novel). 

Scientific truths were made explicit a mere five hundred years ago, with the work of 
Francis Bacon, Rene Descartes and Isaac Newton. In whatever manner our forebears 
viewed the world prior to that, it was not through a scientific lens (any more than they 
could view the moon and the stars through the glass lenses of the equally recent 
telescope). Because we are so scientific now-and so determinedly materialistic-it is 
very difficult for us even to understand that other ways of seeing can and do exist. But 
those who existed during the distant time in which the foundational epics of our culture 
emerged were much more concerned with the actions that dictated survival (and with 
interpreting the world in a manner commensurate with that goal) than with anything 
approximating what we now understand as objective truth. 

Before the dawn of the scientific worldview, reality was construed differently. Being 
was understood as a place of action, not a place of things. It was understood as 
something more akin to story or drama. That story or drama was lived, subjective 
experience, as it manifested itself moment to moment in the consciousness of every living 
person. It was something similar to the stories we tell each other about our lives and their 
personal significance; something similar to the happenings that novelists describe when 
they capture existence in the pages of their books. Subjective experience-that includes 
familiar objects such as trees and clouds, primarily objective in their existence, but also 
(and more importantly) such things as emotions and dreams as well as hunger, thirst and 


43 


pain. It is such things, experienced personally, that are the most fundamental elements of 
human life, from the archaic, dramatic perspective, and they are not easily reducible to 
the detached and objective-even by the modern reductionist, materialist mind. Take 
pain, for example-subjective pain. That's something so real no argument can stand 
against it. Everyone acts as if their pain is real-ultimately, finally real. Pain matters, 
more than matter matters. It is for this reason, I believe, that so many of the world's 
traditions regard the suffering attendant upon existence as the irreducible truth of Being. 

In any case, that which we subjectively experience can be likened much more to a novel or a 
movie than to a scientific description of physical reality. It is the drama of lived 
experience-the unique, tragic, personal death of your father, compared to the objective 
death listed in the hospital records; the pain of your first love; the despair of dashed 
hopes; the joy attendant upon a child's success. 

The Domain, Not of Matter, but of What Matters 

The scientific world of matter can be reduced, in some sense, to its fundamental 
constituent elements: molecules, atoms, even quarks. However, the world of experience 
has primal constituents, as well. These are the necessary elements whose interactions 
define drama and fiction. One of these is chaos. Another is order. The third (as there are 
three) is the process that mediates between the two, which appears identical to what 
modern people call consciousness. It is our eternal subjugation to the first two that makes 
us doubt the validity of existence-that makes us throw up our hands in despair, and fail 
to care for ourselves properly. It is proper understanding of the third that allows us the 
only real way out. 

Chaos is the domain of ignorance itself. It's unexplored territory. Chaos is what extends, 
eternally and without limit, beyond the boundaries of all states, all ideas, and all 
disciplines. It's the foreigner, the stranger, the member of another gang, the rustle in the 
bushes in the night-time, the monster under the bed, the hidden anger of your mother, 
and the sickness of your child. Chaos is the despair and horror you feel when you have 
been profoundly betrayed. It's the place you end up when things fall apart; when your 
dreams die, your career collapses, or your marriage ends. It's the underworld of fairytale 
and myth, where the dragon and the gold it guards eternally co-exist. Chaos is where we 
are when we don't know where we are, and what we are doing when we don't know what 
we are doing. It is, in short, all those things and situations we neither know nor 
understand. 

Chaos is also the formless potential from which the God of Genesis 1 called forth order 
using language at the beginning of time. It's the same potential from which we, made in 
that Image, call forth the novel and ever-changing moments of our lives. And Chaos is 
freedom, dreadful freedom, too. 

Order, by contrast, is explored territory. That's the hundreds-of-millions-of-years-old 
hierarchy of place, position and authority. That's the structure of society. It's the 
structure provided by biology, too-particularly insofar as you are adapted, as you are, to 
the structure of society. Order is tribe, religion, hearth, home and country. It's the warm, 
secure living-room where the fireplace glows and the children play. It's the flag of the 
nation. It's the value of the currency. Order is the floor beneath your feet, and your plan 
for the day. It's the greatness of tradition, the rows of desks in a school classroom, the 
trains that leave on time, the calendar, and the clock. Order is the public facade we're 
called upon to wear, the politeness of a gathering of civilized strangers, and the thin ice 
on which we all skate. Order is the place where the behavior of the world matches our 
expectations and our desires; the place where all things turn out the way we want them 


44 



to. But order is sometimes tyranny and stultification, as well, when the demand for 
certainty and uniformity and purity becomes too one-sided. 

Where everything is certain, we're in order. We're there when things are going 
according to plan and nothing is new and disturbing. In the domain of order, things 
behave as God intended. We like to be there. Familiar environments are congenial. In 
order, we're able to think about things in the long term. There, things work, and we're 
stable, calm and competent. We seldom leave places we understand-geographical or 
conceptual-for that reason, and we certainly do not like it when we are compelled to or 
when it happens accidentally. 

You're in order, when you have a loyal friend, a trustworthy ally. When the same 
person betrays you, sells you out, you move from the daytime world of clarity and light to 
the dark underworld of chaos, confusion and despair. That's the same move you make, 
and the same place you visit, when the company you work starts to fail and your job is 
placed in doubt. When your tax return has been filed, that's order. When you're audited, 
that's chaos. Most people would rather be mugged than audited. Before the Twin Towers 
fell-that was order. Chaos manifested itself afterward. Everyone felt it. The very air 
became uncertain. What exactly was it that fell? Wrong question. What exactly remained 
standing? That was the issue at hand. 

When the ice you're skating on is solid, that's order. When the bottom drops out, and 
things fall apart, and you plunge through the ice, that's chaos. Order is the Shire of 
Tolkien's hobbits: peaceful, productive and safely inhabitable, even by the naive. Chaos is 
the underground kingdom of the dwarves, usurped by Smaug, the treasure-hoarding 
serpent. Chaos is the deep ocean bottom to which Pinocchio voyaged to rescue his father 
from Monstro, whale and fire-breathing dragon. That journey into darkness and rescue is 
the most difficult thing a puppet must do, if he wants to be real; if he wants to extract 
himself from the temptations of deceit and acting and victimization and impulsive 
pleasure and totalitarian subjugation; if he wants to take his place as a genuine Being in 
the world. 

Order is the stability of your marriage. It's buttressed by the traditions of the past and 
by your expectations-grounded, often invisibly, in those traditions. Chaos is that 
stability crumbling under your feet when you discover your partner's infidelity. Chaos is 
the experience of reeling unbound and unsupported through space when your guiding 
routines and traditions collapse. 

Order is the place and time where the oft-invisible axioms you live by organize your 
experience and your actions so that what should happen does happen. Chaos is the new 
place and time that emerges when tragedy strikes suddenly, or malevolence reveals its 
paralyzing visage, even in the confines of your own home. Something unexpected or 
undesired can always make its appearance, when a plan is being laid out, regardless of 
how familiar the circumstances. When that happens, the territory has shifted. Make no 
mistake about it: the space, the apparent space, may be the same. But we live in time, as 
well as space. In consequence, even the oldest and most familiar places retain an 
ineradicable capacity to surprise you. You may be cruising happily down the road in the 
automobile you have known and loved for years. But time is passing. The brakes could 
fail. You might be walking down the road in the body you have always relied on. If your 
heart malfunctions, even momentarily, everything changes. Friendly old dogs can still 
bite. Old and trusted friends can still deceive. New ideas can destroy old and comfortable 
certainties. Such things matter. They're real. 

Our brains respond instantly when chaos appears, with simple, hyper-fast circuits 
maintained from the ancient days, when our ancestors dwelled in trees, and snakes struck 
in a flash. After that nigh-instantaneous, deeply reflexive bodily response comes the 
later-evolving, more complex but slower responses of emotions-and, after that, comes 


45 


thinking, of the higher order, which can extend over seconds, minutes or years. All that 
response is instinctive, in some sense-but the faster the response, the more instinctive. 

Chaos and Order: Personality, Female and Male 

Chaos and order are two of the most fundamental elements of lived experience-two of 
the most basic subdivisions of Being itself. But they're not things, or objects, and they're 
not experienced as such. Things or objects are part of the objective world. They're 
inanimate; spiritless. They're dead. This is not true of chaos and order. Those are 
perceived, experienced and understood (to the degree that they are understood at all) as 
personalities-and that is just as true of the perceptions, experiences and understanding 
of modern people as their ancient forebears. It's just that moderners don't notice. 

Order and chaos are not understood first, objectively (as things or objects), and then 
personified. That would only be the case if we perceived objective reality first, and then 
inferred intent and purpose. But that isn't how perception operates, despite our 
preconceptions. Perception of things as tools, for example, occurs before or in concert 
with perception of things as objects. We see what things mean just as fast or faster than 
we see what they are. Perception of things as entities with personality also occurs before 
perception of things as things. This is particularly true of the action of others, living 
others, but we also see the non-living "objective world" as animated, with purpose and 
intent. This is because of the operation of what psychologists have called "the hyperactive 
agency detector" within us. We evolved, over millennia, within intensely social 
circumstances. This means that the most significant elements of our environment of 
origin were personalities, not things, objects or situations. 

The personalities we have evolved to perceive have been around, in predictable form, 
and in typical, hierarchical configurations, forever, for all intents and purposes. They have 
been male or female, for example, for a billion years. That's a long time. The division of 
life into its twin sexes occurred before the evolution of multi-cellular animals. It was in a 
still-respectable one-fifth of that time that mammals, who take extensive care of their 
young, emerged. Thus, the category of "parent" and/or "child" has been around for 200 
million years. That's longer than birds have existed. That's longer than flowers have 
grown. It's not a billion years, but it's still a very long time. It's plenty long enough for 
male and female and parent and child to serve as vital and fundamental parts of the 
environment to which we have adapted. This means that male and female and parent and 
child are categories, for us-natural categories, deeply embedded in our perceptual, 
emotional and motivational structures. 

Our brains are deeply social. Other creatures (particularly, other humans) were 
crucially important to us as we lived, mated and evolved. Those creatures were literally 
our natural habitat-our environment. From a Darwinian perspective, nature-reality 
itself; the environment, itself-is what selects. The environment cannot be defined in any 
more fundamental manner. It is not mere inert matter. Reality itself is whatever we 
contend with when we are striving to survive and reproduce. A lot of that is other beings, 
their opinions of us, and their communities. And that's that. 

Over the millennia, as our brain capacity increased and we developed curiosity to spare, 
we became increasingly aware of and curious about the nature of the world-what we 
eventually conceptualized as the objective world-outside the personalities of family and 
troupe. And "outside" is not merely unexplored physical territory. Outside is outside of 
what we currently understand-and understanding is dealing with and coping with and not 
merely representing objectively. But our brains had been long concentrating on other people. 
Thus, it appears that we first began to perceive the unknown, chaotic, non-human world 
with the innate categories of our social brain. And even this is a misstatement: when we 


46 


first began to perceive the unknown, chaotic, non-animal world, we used categories that 
had originally evolved to represent the pre-human animal social world. Our minds are far 
older than mere humanity. Our categories are far older than our species. Our most basic 
category-as old, in some sense, as the sexual act itself-appears to be that of sex, male 
and female. We appear to have taken that primordial knowledge of structured, creative 
opposition and begun to interpret everything through its lens. 

Order, the known, appears symbolically associated with masculinity (as illustrated in 
the aforementioned yang of the Taoist yin-yang symbol). This is perhaps because the 
primary hierarchical structure of human society is masculine, as it is among most 
animals, including the chimpanzees who are our closest genetic and, arguably, 
behavioural match. It is because men are and throughout history have been the builders 
of towns and cities, the engineers, stonemasons, bricklayers, and lumberjacks, the 
operators of heavy machinery. Order is God the Father, the eternal Judge, ledger-keeper 
and dispenser of rewards and punishments. Order is the peacetime army of policemen 
and soldiers. It's the political culture, the corporate environment, and the system. It's the 
"they" in "you know what they say." It's credit cards, classrooms, supermarket checkout 
lineups, turn-taking, traffic lights, and the familiar routes of daily commuters. Order, 
when pushed too far, when imbalanced, can also manifest itself destructively and terribly. 
It does so as the forced migration, the concentration camp, and the soul-devouring 
uniformity of the goose-step. 

Chaos-the unknown-is symbolically associated with the feminine. This is partly 
because all the things we have come to know were born, originally, of the unknown, just 
as all beings we encounter were born of mothers. Chaos is mater, origin, source, mother; 
materia, the substance from which all things are made. It is also what matters, or what is the 
matter -the very subject matter of thought and communication. In its positive guise, 
chaos is possibility itself, the source of ideas, the mysterious realm of gestation and birth. 
As a negative force, it's the impenetrable darkness of a cave and the accident by the side 
of the road. It's the mother grizzly, all compassion to her cubs, who marks you as 
potential predator and tears you to pieces. 

Chaos, the eternal feminine, is also the crushing force of sexual selection. Women are 
choosy maters (unlike female chimps, their closest animal counterparts ). Most men do 
not meet female human standards. It is for this reason that women on dating sites rate 85 
percent of men as below average in attractiveness. It is for this reason that we all have 
twice as many female ancestors as male (imagine that all the women who have ever lived 
have averaged one child. Now imagine that half the men who have ever lived have 
fathered two children, if they had any, while the other half fathered none).- It is Woman 
as Nature who looks at half of all men and says, "No!" For the men, that's a direct 
encounter with chaos, and it occurs with devastating force every time they are turned 
down for a date. Human female choosiness is also why we are very different from the 
common ancestor we shared with our chimpanzee cousins, while the latter are very much 
the same. Women's proclivity to say no, more than any other force, has shaped our 
evolution into the creative, industrious, upright, large-brained (competitive, aggressive, 
domineering) creatures that we are. It is Nature as Woman who says, "Well, bucko, 
you're good enough for a friend, but my experience of you so far has not indicated the 
suitability of your genetic material for continued propagation." 

The most profound religious symbols rely for their power in large part on this 
underlying fundamentally bipartisan conceptual subdivision. The Star of David is, for 
example, the downward pointing triangle of femininity and the upward pointing triangle 
of the male. It's the same for the yoni and lingam of Hinduism (which come covered 
with snakes, our ancient adversaries and provocateurs: the Shiva Linga is depicted with 


47 


snake deities called the Nagas). The ancient Egyptians represented Osiris, god of the 
state, and Isis, goddess of the underworld, as twin cobras with their tails knotted 
together. The same symbol was used in China to portray Fuxi and Nuwa, creators of 
humanity and of writing. The representations in Christianity are less abstract, more like 
personalities, but the familiar Western images of the Virgin Mary with the Christ Child 
and the Pieta both express the female/male dual unity, as does the traditional insistence 
on the androgyny of Christ. 

It should also be noted, finally, that the structure of the brain itself at a gross 
morphological level appears to reflect this duality. This, to me, indicates the fundamental, 
beyond-the-metaphorical reality of this symbolically feminine/masculine divide, since the 
brain is adapted, by definition, to reality itself (that is, reality conceptualized in this 
quasi-Darwinian manner). Elkhonon Goldberg, student of the great Russian 
neuropsychologist Alexander Luria, has proposed quite lucidly and directly that the very 
hemispheric structure of the cortex reflects the fundamental division between novelty 
(the unknown, or chaos) and routinization (the known, order). He doesn't make 
reference to the symbols representing the structure of the world in reference to this 
theory, but that's all the better: an idea is more credible when it emerges as a 
consequence of investigations in different realms. 

We already know all this, but we don't know we know it. But we immediately 
comprehend it when it's articulated in a manner such as this. Everyone understands order 
and chaos, world and underworld, when it's explained using these terms. We all have a 
palpable sense of the chaos lurking under everything familiar. That's why we understand 
the strange, surreal stories of Pinocchio, and Sleeping Beauty, and The Lion King, and The 
Little Mermaid, and Beauty and the Beast, with their eternal landscapes of known and 
unknown, world and underworld. We've all been in both places, many times: sometimes 
by happenstance, sometimes by choice. 

Many things begin to fall into place when you begin to consciously understand the 
world in this manner. It's as if the knowledge of your body and soul falls into alignment 
with the knowledge of your intellect. And there's more: such knowledge is proscriptive, 
as well as descriptive. This is the kind of knowing what that helps you know how. This is 
the kind of is from which you can derive an ought. The Taoist juxtaposition of yin and 
yang, for example, doesn't simply portray chaos and order as the fundamental elements of 
Being-it also tells you how to act. The Way, the Taoist path of life, is represented by (or 
exists on) the border between the twin serpents. The Way is the path of proper Being. It's 
the same Way as that referred to by Christ in John 14:6: I am the way, and the truth and the 
life. The same idea is expressed in Matthew 7:14: Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the 
way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. 

We eternally inhabit order, surrounded by chaos. We eternally occupy known territory, 
surrounded by the unknown. We experience meaningful engagement when we mediate 
appropriately between them. We are adapted, in the deepest Darwinian sense, not to the 
world of objects, but to the meta-realities of order and chaos, yang and yin. Chaos and 
order make up the eternal, transcendent environment of the living. 

To straddle that fundamental duality is to be balanced: to have one foot firmly planted 
in order and security, and the other in chaos, possibility, growth and adventure. When life 
suddenly reveals itself as intense, gripping and meaningful; when time passes and you're 
so engrossed in what you're doing you don't notice-it is there and then that you are 
located precisely on the border between order and chaos. The subjective meaning that we 
encounter there is the reaction of our deepest being, our neurologically and evolutionarily 
grounded instinctive self, indicating that we are ensuring the stability but also the 
expansion of habitable, productive territory, of space that is personal, social and natural. 
It's the right place to be, in every sense. You are there when-and where-it matters. 


48 


That's what music is telling you, too, when you're listening-even more, perhaps, when 
you're dancing-when its harmonious layered patterns of predictability and 
unpredictability make meaning itself well up from the most profound depths of your 
Being. 

Chaos and order are fundamental elements because every lived situation (even every 
conceivable lived situation) is made up of both. No matter where we are, there are some 
things we can identify, make use of, and predict, and some things we neither know nor 
understand. No matter who we are, Kalahari Desert-dweller or Wall Street banker, some 
things are under our control, and some things are not. That's why both can understand 
the same stories, and dwell within the confines of the same eternal truths. Finally, the 
fundamental reality of chaos and order is true for everything alive, not only for us. Living 
things are always to be found in places they can master, surrounded by things and 
situations that make them vulnerable. 

Order is not enough. You can't just be stable, and secure, and unchanging, because 
there are still vital and important new things to be learned. Nonetheless, chaos can be too 
much. You can't long tolerate being swamped and overwhelmed beyond your capacity to 
cope while you are learning what you still need to know. Thus, you need to place one foot 
in what you have mastered and understood and the other in what you are currently 
exploring and mastering. Then you have positioned yourself where the terror of existence 
is under control and you are secure, but where you are also alert and engaged. That is 
where there is something new to master and some way that you can be improved. That is 
where meaning is to be found. 

The Garden of Eden 

Remember, as discussed earlier, that the Genesis stories were amalgamated from several 
sources. After the newer Priestly story (Genesis 1), recounting the emergence of order 
from chaos, comes the second, even more ancient, "Jahwist" part, beginning, essentially, 
with Genesis 2. The Jahwist account, which uses the name YHWH orjahweh to represent 
God, contains the story of Adam and Eve, along with a much fuller explication of the 
events of the sixth day alluded to in the previous "Priestly" story. The continuity between 
the stories appears to be the result of careful editing by the person or persons known 
singly to biblical scholars as the "Redactor," who wove the stories together. This may 
have occurred when the peoples of two traditions united, for one reason or another, and 
the subsequent illogic of their melded stories, growing together over time in an ungainly 
fashion, bothered someone conscious, courageous, and obsessed with coherence. 

According to the Jahwist creation story, God first created a bounded space, known as 
Eden (which, in Aramaic-Jesus's putative language-means well-watered place) or 
Paradise (pairidaeza in old Iranian or Avestan, which means walled or protected enclosure 
or garden). God placed Adam in there, along with all manner of fruit-bearing trees, two of 
which were marked out. One of these was the Tree of Life; the other, the Tree of 
Knowledge of Good and Evil. God then told Adam to have his fill of fruit, as he wished, 
but added that the fruit of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil was forbidden. 
After that, He created Eve as a partner for Adam. 

Adam and Eve don't seem very conscious, at the beginning, when they are first placed 
in Paradise, and they were certainly not self-conscious. As the story insists, the original 
parents were naked, but not ashamed. Such phrasing implies first that it's perfectly 
natural and normal for people to be ashamed of their nakedness (otherwise nothing 
would have to be said about its absence) and second that there was something amiss, for 
better or worse, with our first parents. Although there are exceptions, the only people 
around now who would be unashamed if suddenly dropped naked into a public place- 


49 


excepting the odd exhibitionist-are those younger than three years of age. In fact, a 
common nightmare involves the sudden appearance of the dreamer, naked, on a stage in 
front of a packed house. 

In the third verse of Genesis, a serpent appears-first, apparently, in legged form. God 
only knows why He allowed-or placed-such a creature in the garden. I have long 
puzzled over the meaning of this. It seems to be a reflection, in part, of the order/chaos 
dichotomy characterizing all of experience, with Paradise serving as habitable order and 
the serpent playing the role of chaos. The serpent in Eden therefore means the same thing 
as the black dot in the yin side of the Taoist yin/yang symbol of totality-that is, the 
possibility of the unknown and revolutionary suddenly manifesting itself where 
everything appears calm. 

It just does not appear possible, even for God himself, to make a bounded space 
completely protected from the outside-not in the real world, with its necessary 
limitations, surrounded by the transcendent. The outside, chaos, always sneaks into the 
inside, because nothing can be completely walled off from the rest of reality. So even the 
ultimate in safe spaces inevitably harbours a snake. There were-forever-genuine, 
quotidian, reptilian snakes in the grass and in the trees of our original African paradise. 
Even had all of those been banished, however (in some inconceivable manner, by some 
primordial St. George) snakes would have still remained in the form of our primordial 
human rivals (at least when they were acting like enemies, from our limited, in-group, 
kin-bonded perspectives). There was, after all, no shortage of conflict and warfare among 
our ancestors, tribal and otherwise. 

And even if we had defeated all the snakes that beset us from without, reptilian and 
human alike, we would still not have been safe. Nor are we now. We have seen the 
enemy, after all, and he is us. The snake inhabits each of our souls. This is the reason, as 
far as I can tell, for the strange Christian insistence, made most explicit by John Milton, 
that the snake in the Garden of Eden was also Satan, the Spirit of Evil itself. The 
importance of this symbolic identification-its staggering brilliance-can hardly be 
overstated. It is through such millennia-long exercise of the imagination that the idea of 
abstracted moral concepts themselves, with all they entail, developed. Work beyond 
comprehension was invested into the idea of Good and Evil, and its surrounding, dream- 
like metaphor. The worst of all possible snakes is the eternal human proclivity for evil. The worst 
of all possible snakes is psychological, spiritual, personal, internal. No walls, however tall, will 
keep that out. Even if the fortress were thick enough, in principle, to keep everything bad 
whatsoever outside, it would immediately appear again within. As the great Russian 
writer Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn insisted, the line dividing good and evil cuts through the 
heart of every human being. 

There is simply no way to wall off some isolated portion of the greater surrounding 
reality and make everything permanently predictable and safe within it. Some of what has 
been no-matter-how-carefully excluded will always sneak back in. A serpent, 
metaphorically speaking, will inevitably appear. Even the most assiduous of parents 
cannot fully protect their children, even if they lock them in the basement, safely away 
from drugs, alcohol and internet porn. In that extreme case, the too-cautious, too-caring 
parent merely substitutes him or herself for the other terrible problems of life. This is the 
great Freudian Oedipal nightmare. It is far better to render Beings in your care competent than 
to protect them. 

And even if it were possible to permanently banish everything threatening-everything 
dangerous (and, therefore, everything challenging and interesting), that would mean only 
that another danger would emerge: that of permanent human infantilism and absolute 
uselessness. How could the nature of man ever reach its full potential without challenge 
and danger? How dull and contemptible would we become if there was no longer reason 


50 


to pay attention? Maybe God thought His new creation would be able to handle the 
serpent, and considered its presence the lesser of two evils. 

Question for parents: do you want to make your children safe, or strong? 

In any case, there's a serpent in the Garden, and he's a "subtil" beast, according to the 
ancient story (difficult to see, vaporous, cunning, deceitful and treacherous). It therefore 
comes as no surprise when he decides to play a trick on Eve. Why Eve, instead of Adam? 
It could just be chance. It was fifty-fifty for Eve, statistically speaking, and those are pretty 
high odds. But I have learned that these old stories contain nothing superfluous. 
Anything accidental-anything that does not serve the plot-has long been forgotten in 
the telling. As the Russian playwright Anton Chekhov advised, "If there is a rifle hanging 
on the wall in act one, it must be fired in the next act. Otherwise it has no business being 
there." Perhaps primordial Eve had more reason to attend to serpents than Adam. 
Maybe they were more likely, for example, to prey on her tree-dwelling infants. Perhaps it 
is for this reason that Eve's daughters are more protective, self-conscious, fearful and 
nervous, to this day (even, and especially, in the most egalitarian of modern human 
societies^ ). In any case, the serpent tells Eve that if she eats the forbidden fruit, she 
won't die. Instead, her eyes will be opened. She will become like God, knowing good from 
evil. Of course, the serpent doesn't let her know she will be like God in only that one way. 
But he is a serpent, after all. Being human, and wanting to know more, Eve decides to eat 
the fruit. Poof! She wakes up: she's conscious, or perhaps self-conscious, for the first 
time. 

Now, no clear-seeing, conscious woman is going to tolerate an unawakened man. So, 
Eve immediately shares the fruit with Adam. That makes him self-conscious. Little has 
changed. Women have been making men self-conscious since the beginning of time. They 
do this primarily by rejecting them-but they also do it by shaming them, if men do not 
take responsibility. Since women bear the primary burden of reproduction, it's no 
wonder. It is very hard to see how it could be otherwise. But the capacity of women to 
shame men and render them self-conscious is still a primal force of nature. 

Now, you may ask: what in the world have snakes got to do with vision? Well, first, it's 
clearly of some importance to see them, because they might prey on you (particularly 
when you're little and live in trees, like our arboreal ancestors). Dr. Lynn Isbell, professor 
of anthropology and animal behaviour at the University of California, has suggested that 
the stunningly acute vision almost uniquely possessed by human beings was an 
adaptation forced on us tens of millions of years ago by the necessity of detecting and 
avoiding the terrible danger of snakes, with whom our ancestors co-evolved. This is 
perhaps one of the reasons the snake features in the garden of Paradise as the creature 
who gave us the vision of God (in addition to serving as the primordial and eternal enemy 
of mankind). This is perhaps one of the reasons why Mary, the eternal, archetypal mother 
-Eve perfected-is so commonly shown in medieval and Renaissance iconography 
holding the Christ Child in the air, as far away as possible from a predatory reptile, which 
she has firmly pinned under her foot.- And there's more. It's fruit that the snake offers, 
and fruit is also associated with a transformation of vision, in that our ability to see color 
is an adaptation that allows us to rapidly detect the ripe and therefore edible bounty of 

c.a 

trees. 

Our primordial parents hearkened to the snake. They ate the fruit. Their eyes opened. 
They both awoke. You might think, as Eve did initially, that this would be a good thing. 
Sometimes, however, half a gift is worse than none. Adam and Eve wake up, all right, but 
only enough to discover some terrible things. First, they notice that they're naked. 

The Naked Ape 


51 


My son figured out that he was naked well before he was three. He wanted to dress 
himself. He kept the washroom door firmly shut. He didn't appear in public without his 
clothes. I couldn't for the life of me see how this had anything to do with his upbringing. 
It was his own discovery, his own realization, and his own choice of reactions. It looked 
built in, to me. 

What does it mean to know yourself naked-or, potentially worse, to know yourself 
and your partner naked? All manner of terrible things-expressed in the rather horrifying 
manner, for example, of the Renaissance painter Hans Baldung Grien, whose painting 
inspired the illustration that begins this chapter. Naked means vulnerable and easily 
damaged. Naked means subject to judgment for beauty and health. Naked means 
unprotected and unarmed in the jungle of nature and man. This is why Adam and Eve 
became ashamed, immediately after their eyes were opened. They could see-and what 
they first saw was themselves. Their faults stood out. Their vulnerability was on display. 
Unlike other mammals, whose delicate abdomens are protected by the armour-like 
expanse of their backs, they were upright creatures, with the most vulnerable parts of 
their body presented to the world. And worse was to come. Adam and Eve made 
themselves loincloths (in the International Standard Version; aprons in the King James 
Version) right away, to cover up their fragile bodies-and to protect their egos. Then they 
promptly skittered off and hid. In their vulnerability, now fully realized, they felt 
unworthy to stand before God. 

If you can't identify with that sentiment, you're just not thinking. Beauty shames the 
ugly. Strength shames the weak. Death shames the living-and the Ideal shames us all. 
Thus we fear it, resent it-even hate it (and, of course, that's the theme next examined in 
Genesis, in the story of Cain and Abel). What are we to do about that? Abandon all ideals 
of beauty, health, brilliance and strength? That's not a good solution. That would merely 
ensure that we would feel ashamed, all the time-and that we would even more justly 
deserve it. I don't want women who can stun by their mere presence to disappear just so 
that others can feel unselfconscious. I don't want intellects such as John von Neumann's 
to vanish, just because of my barely-grade-twelve grasp of mathematics. By the time he 
was nineteen, he had redefined numbers. Numbers! Thank God for John von Neumann! 
Thank God for Grace Kelly and Anita Ekberg and Monica Bellucci! I'm proud to feel 
unworthy in the presence of people like that. It's the price we all pay for aim, achievement 
and ambition. But it's also no wonder that Adam and Eve covered themselves up. 

The next part of the story is downright farcical, in my opinion, although it's also tragic 
and terrible. That evening, when Eden cools down, God goes out for His evening stroll. 
But Adam is absent. This puzzles God, who is accustomed to walking with him. "Adam," 
calls God, apparently forgetting that He can see through bushes, "Where are you?" Adam 
immediately reveals himself, but badly: first as a neurotic; then, as a ratfink. The creator 
of all the universe calls, and Adam replies: "I heard you, God. But I was naked, and hid." 
What does this mean? It means that people, unsettled by their vulnerability, eternally fear 
to tell the truth, to mediate between chaos and order, and to manifest their destiny. In 
other words, they are afraid to walk with God. That's not particularly admirable, perhaps, 
but it's certainly understandable. God's a judgmental father. His standards are high. He's 
hard to please. 

God says, "Who told you that you were naked? Did you eat something you weren't 
supposed to?" And Adam, in his wretchedness, points right at Eve, his love, his partner, 
his soul-mate, and snitches on her. And then he blames God. He says, "The woman, 
whom you gave to me, she gave it to me (and then I ate it)." How pathetic-and how 
accurate. The first woman made the first man self-conscious and resentful. Then the first 
man blamed the woman. And then the first man blamed God. This is exactly how every 
spurned male feels, to this day. First, he feels small, in front of the potential object of his 


52 


love, after she denigrates his reproductive suitability. Then he curses God for making her 
so bitchy, himself so useless (if he has any sense) and Being itself so deeply flawed. Then 
he turns to thoughts of revenge. How thoroughly contemptible (and how utterly 
understandable). At least the woman had the serpent to blame, and it later turns out that 
snake is Satan himself, unlikely as that seems. Thus, we can understand and sympathize 
with Eve's error. She was deceived by the best. But Adam! No one forced his words from 
his mouth. 

Unfortunately, the worst isn't over-for Man or Beast. First, God curses the serpent, 
telling him that he will now have to slither around, legless, forever in peril of being 
stomped on by angry humans. Second, He tells the woman that she will now bring forth 
children in sorrow, and desire an unworthy, sometimes resentful man, who will in 
consequence lord her biological fate over her, permanently. What might this mean? It 
could just mean that God is a patriarchal tyrant, as politically motivated interpretations of 
the ancient story insist. I think it's-merely descriptive. Merely. And here is why: As 
human beings evolved, the brains that eventually gave rise to self-consciousness expanded 
tremendously. This produced an evolutionary arms race between fetal head and female 
pelvis. The female graciously widened her hips, almost to the point where running 
would no longer be possible. The baby, for his part, allowed himself to be born more than 
a year early, compared to other mammals of his size, and evolved a semi-collapsible 
head. This was and is a painful adjustment for both. The essentially fetal baby is almost 
completely dependent on his mother for everything during that first year. The 
programmability of his massive brain means that he must be trained until he is eighteen 
(or thirty) before being pushed out of the nest. This is to say nothing of the woman's 
consequential pain in childbirth, and high risk of death for mother and infant alike. This 
all means that women pay a high price for pregnancy and child-rearing, particularly in the 
early stages, and that one of the inevitable consequences is increased dependence upon 
the sometimes unreliable and always problematic good graces of men. 

After God tells Eve what is going to happen, now that she has awakened, He turns to 
Adam-who, along with his male descendants, doesn't get off any easier. God says 
something akin to this: "Man, because you attended to the woman, your eyes have been 
opened. Your godlike vision, granted to you by snake, fruit and lover, allows you to see 
far, even into the future. But those who see into the future can also eternally see trouble 
coming, and must then prepare for all contingencies and possibilities. To do that, you will 
have to eternally sacrifice the present for the future. You must put aside pleasure for 
security. In short: you will have to work. And it's going to be difficult. I hope you're fond 
of thorns and thistles, because you're going to grow a lot of them." 

And then God banishes the first man and the first woman from Paradise, out of infancy, 
out of the unconscious animal world, into the horrors of history itself. And then He puts 
cherubim and a flaming sword at the gate of Eden, just to stop them from eating the Fruit 
of the Tree of Life. That, in particular, appears rather mean-spirited. Why not just make 
the poor humans immortal, right away? Particularly if that is your plan for the ultimate 
future, anyway, as the story goes? But who would dare to question God? 

Perhaps Heaven is something you must build, and immortality something you must 
earn. 

And so we return to our original query: Why would someone buy prescription 
medication for his dog, and then so carefully administer it, when he would not do the 
same for himself? Now you have the answer, derived from one of the foundational texts 
of mankind. Why should anyone take care of anything as naked, ugly, ashamed, 
frightened, worthless, cowardly, resentful, defensive and accusatory as a descendant of 
Adam? Even if that thing, that being, is himself? And I do not mean at all to exclude 
women with this phrasing. 


53 


All the reasons we have discussed so far for taking a dim view of humanity are 
applicable to others, as much as to the self. They're generalizations about human nature; 
nothing more specific. But you know so much more about yourself. You're bad enough, as 
other people know you. But only you know the full range of your secret transgressions, 
insufficiencies and inadequacies. No one is more familiar than you with all the ways your 
mind and body are flawed. No one has more reason to hold you in contempt, to see you 
as pathetic-and by withholding something that might do you good, you can punish 
yourself for all your failings. A dog, a harmless, innocent, unselfconscious dog, is clearly 
more deserving. 

But if you are not yet convinced, let us consider another vital issue. Order, chaos, life, 
death, sin, vision, work and suffering: that is not enough for the authors of Genesis, nor 
for humanity itself. The story continues, in all its catastrophe and tragedy, and the people 
involved (that's us) must contend with yet another painful awakening. We are next fated 
to contemplate morality itself. 

Good and Evil 

When their eyes are opened, Adam and Eve realize more than just their nakedness and 
the necessity of toil. They also come to know Good and Evil (the serpent says, referring to 
the fruit, "For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be 
opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil"). What could that possibly 
mean? What could be left to explore and relate, after the vast ground already covered? 
Well, simple context indicates that it must have something to do with gardens, snakes, 
disobedience, fruit, sexuality and nakedness. It was the last item-nakedness-that finally 
clued me in. It took years. 

Dogs are predators. So are cats. They kill things and eat them. It's not pretty. But we'll 
take them as pets and care for them, and give them their medication when they're sick, 
regardless. Why? They're predators, but it's just their nature. They do not bear 
responsibility for it. They're hungry, not evil. They don't have the presence of mind, the 
creativity-and, above all, the self-consciousness-necessary for the inspired cruelty of 
man. 

Why not? It's simple. Unlike us, predators have no comprehension of their 
fundamental weakness, their fundamental vulnerability, their own subjugation to pain 
and death. But we know exactly how and where we can be hurt, and why. That is as good 
a definition as any of self-consciousness. We are aware of our own defencelessness, 
finitude and mortality. We can feel pain, and self-disgust, and shame, and horror, and we 
know it. We know what makes us suffer. We know how dread and pain can be inflicted 
on us-and that means we know exactly how to inflict it on others. We know how we are 
naked, and how that nakedness can be exploited-and that means we know how others 
are naked, and how they can be exploited. 

We can terrify other people, consciously. We can hurt and humiliate them for faults we 
understand only too well. We can torture them-literally-slowly, artfully and terribly. 
That's far more than predation. That's a qualitative shift in understanding. That's a 
cataclysm as large as the development of self-consciousness itself. That's the entry of the 
knowledge of Good and Evil into the world. That's a second as-yet-unhealed fracture in 
the structure of Existence. That's the transformation of Being itself into a moral 
endeavour-all attendant on the development of sophisticated self-consciousness. 

Only man could conceive of the rack, the iron maiden and the thumbscrew. Only man 
will inflict suffering for the sake of suffering. That is the best definition of evil I have been 
able to formulate. Animals can't manage that, but humans, with their excruciating, semi- 
divine capacities, most certainly can. And with this realization we have well-nigh full 


54 



legitimization of the idea, very unpopular in modern intellectual circles, of Original Sin. 
And who would dare to say that there was no element of voluntary choice in our 
evolutionary, individual and theological transformation? Our ancestors chose their sexual 
partners, and they selected for-consciousness? And self-consciousness? And moral 
knowledge? And who can deny the sense of existential guilt that pervades human 
experience? And who could avoid noting that without that guilt-that sense of inbuilt 
corruption and capacity for wrongdoing-a man is one step from psychopathy? 

Human beings have a great capacity for wrongdoing. It's an attribute that is unique in 
the world of life. We can and do make things worse, voluntarily, with full knowledge of 
what we are doing (as well as accidentally, and carelessly, and in a manner that is willfully 
blind). Given that terrible capacity, that proclivity for malevolent actions, is it any wonder 
we have a hard time taking care of ourselves, or others-or even that we doubt the value 
of the entire human enterprise? And we've suspected ourselves, for good reason, for a 
very long time. Thousands of years ago, the ancient Mesopotamians believed, for 
example, that mankind itself was made from the blood of Kingu, the single most terrible 
monster that the great Goddess of Chaos could produce, in her most vengeful and 
destructive moments. After drawing conclusions such as that, how could we not 
question the value of our being, and even of Being itself? Who then could be faced with 
illness, in himself or another, without doubting the moral utility of prescribing a healing 
medicament? And no one understands the darkness of the individual better than the 
individual himself. Who, then, when ill, is going to be fully committed to his own care? 

Perhaps Man is something that should never have been. Perhaps the world should even 
be cleansed of all human presence, so that Being and consciousness could return to the 
innocent brutality of the animal. I believe that the person who claims never to have 
wished for such a thing has neither consulted his memory nor confronted his darkest 
fantasies. 

What then is to be done? 

A Spark of the Divine 

In Genesis 1, God creates the world with the divine, truthful Word, generating habitable, 
paradisal order from the precosmogonic chaos. He then creates Man and Woman in His 
Image, imbuing them with the capacity to do the same-to create order from chaos, and 
continue His work. At each stage of creation, including that involving the formation of 
the first couple, God reflects upon what has come to be, and pronounces it Good. 

The juxtaposition of Genesis 1 with Genesis 2 & 3 (the latter two chapters outlining 
the fall of man, describing why our lot is so tragedy-ridden and ethically torturous) 
produces a narrative sequence almost unbearable in its profundity. The moral of Genesis 
1 is that Being brought into existence through true speech is Good. This is true even of 
man himself, prior to his separation from God. This goodness is terribly disrupted by the 
events of the fall (and of Cain and Abel and the Flood and the Tower of Babel), but we 
retain an intimation of the prelapsarian state. We remember, so to speak. We remain 
eternally nostalgic for the innocence of childhood, the divine, unconscious Being of the 
animal, and the untouched cathedral-like old-growth forest. We find respite in such 
things. We worship them, even if we are self-proclaimed atheistic environmentalists of 
the most anti-human sort. The original state of Nature, conceived in this manner, is 
paradisal. But we are no longer one with God and Nature, and there is no simple turning 
back. 

The original Man and Woman, existing in unbroken unity with their Creator, did not 
appear conscious (and certainly not self-conscious). Their eyes were not open. But, in 
their perfection, they were also less, not more, than their post-Fail counterparts. Their 


55 


goodness was something bestowed, rather than deserved or earned. They exercised no 
choice. God knows, that's easier. But maybe it's not better than, for example, goodness 
genuinely earned. Maybe, even in some cosmic sense (assuming that consciousness itself 
is a phenomenon of cosmic significance), free choice matters. Who can speak with 
certainty about such things? I am unwilling to take these questions off the table, however, 
merely because they are difficult. So, here's a proposition: perhaps it is not simply the 
emergence of self-consciousness and the rise of our moral knowledge of Death and the 
Fall that besets us and makes us doubt our own worth. Perhaps it is instead our 
unwillingness-reflected in Adam's shamed hiding-to walk with God, despite our 
fragility and propensity for evil. 

The entire Bible is structured so that everything after the Fall-the history of Israel, the 
prophets, the coming of Christ-is presented as a remedy for that Fall, a way out of evil. 
The beginning of conscious history, the rise of the state and all its pathologies of pride 
and rigidity, the emergence of great moral figures who try to set things right, culminating 
in the Messiah Himself-that is all part of humanity's attempt, God willing, to set itself 
right. And what would that mean? 

And this is an amazing thing: the answer is already implicit in Genesis 1: to embody the 
Image of God-to speak out of chaos the Being that is Good-but to do so consciously, of 
our own free choice. Back is the way forward-as T. S. Eliot so rightly insisted-but back 
as awake beings, exercising the proper choice of awake beings, instead of back to sleep: 

We shall not cease from exploration 
And the end of all our exploring 
Will be to arrive where we started 
And know the place for the first time. 

Through the unknown, remembered gate 
When the last of earth left to discover 
Is that which was the beginning; 

At the source of the longest river 
The voice of the hidden waterfall 
And the children in the apple-tree 

Not known, because not looked for 
But heard, half-heard, in the stillness 
Between two waves of the sea. 

Quick now, here, now, always - 

A condition of complete simplicity 
(Costing not less than everything) 

And all shall be well and 
All manner of things shall be well 
When the tongues of flames are in-folded 
Into the crowned knot of fire 
And the fire and the rose are one. 

("Little Gidding," Four Quartets, 1943) 

If we wish to take care of ourselves properly, we would have to respect ourselves-but we 
don't, because we are-not least in our own eyes-fallen creatures. If we lived in Truth; if 
we spoke the Truth-then we could walk with God once again, and respect ourselves, and 
others, and the world. Then we might treat ourselves like people we cared for. We might 
strive to set the world straight. We might orient it toward Heaven, where we would want 
people we cared for to dwell, instead of Hell, where our resentment and hatred would 
eternally sentence everyone. 

In the areas where Christianity emerged two thousand years ago, people were much 
more barbaric than they are today. Conflict was everywhere. Human sacrifice, including 
that of children, was a common occurrence even in technologically sophisticated societies, 
such as that of ancient Carthage. In Rome, arena sports were competitions to the death, 
and the spilling of blood was a commonplace. The probability that a modern person, in a 
functional democratic country, will now kill or be killed is infinitesimally low compared to 
what it was in previous societies (and still is, in the unorganized and anarchic parts of the 


56 


world). Then, the primary moral issue confronting society was control of violent, 
impulsive selfishness and the mindless greed and brutality that accompanies it. People 
with those aggressive tendencies still exist. At least now they know that such behaviour is 
sub-optimal, and either try to control it or encounter major social obstacles if they don't. 

But now, also, another problem has arisen, which was perhaps less common in our 
harsher past. It is easy to believe that people are arrogant, and egotistical, and always 
looking out for themselves. The cynicism that makes that opinion a universal truism is 
widespread and fashionable. But such an orientation to the world is not at all 
characteristic of many people. They have the opposite problem: they shoulder intolerable 
burdens of self-disgust, self-contempt, shame and self-consciousness. Thus, instead of 
narcissistically inflating their own importance, they don't value themselves at all, and they 
don't take care of themselves with attention and skill. It seems that people often don't 
really believe that they deserve the best care, personally speaking. They are excruciatingly 
aware of their own faults and inadequacies, real and exaggerated, and ashamed and 
doubtful of their own value. They believe that other people shouldn't suffer, and they will 
work diligently and altruistically to help them alleviate it. They extend the same courtesy 
even to the animals they are acquainted with-but not so easily to themselves. 

It is true that the idea of virtuous self-sacrifice is deeply embedded in Western culture 
(at least insofar as the West has been influenced by Christianity, which is based on the 
imitation of someone who performed the ultimate act of self-sacrifice). Any claim that the 
Golden Rule does not mean "sacrifice yourself for others" might therefore appear 
dubious. But Christ's archetypal death exists as an example of how to accept finitude, 
betrayal and tyranny heroically-how to walk with God despite the tragedy of self- 
conscious knowledge-and not as a directive to victimize ourselves in the service of 
others. To sacrifice ourselves to God (to the highest good, if you like) does not mean to 
suffer silently and willingly when some person or organization demands more from us, 
consistently, than is offered in return. That means we are supporting tyranny, and 
allowing ourselves to be treated like slaves. It is not virtuous to be victimized by a bully, 
even if that bully is oneself. 

I learned two very important lessons from Carl Jung, the famous Swiss depth 
psychologist, about "doing unto others as you would have them do unto you" or "loving 
your neighbour as yourself." The first lesson was that neither of these statements has 
anything to do with being nice. The second was that both are equations, rather than 
injunctions. If I am someone's friend, family member, or lover, then I am morally obliged 
to bargain as hard on my own behalf as they are on theirs. If I fail to do so, I will end up a 
slave, and the other person a tyrant. What good is that? It much better for any 
relationship when both partners are strong. Furthermore, there is little difference 
between standing up and speaking for yourself, when you are being bullied or otherwise 
tormented and enslaved, and standing up and speaking for someone else. As Jung points 
out, this means embracing and loving the sinner who is yourself, as much as forgiving and 
aiding someone else who is stumbling and imperfect. 

As God himself claims (so goes the story), "Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the 
Lord." According to this philosophy, you do not simply belong to yourself. You are not 
simply your own possession to torture and mistreat. This is partly because your Being is 
inexorably tied up with that of others, and your mistreatment of yourself can have 
catastrophic consequences for others. This is most clearly evident, perhaps, in the 
aftermath of suicide, when those left behind are often both bereft and traumatized. But, 
metaphorically speaking, there is also this: you have a spark of the divine in you, which 
belongs not to you, but to God. We are, after all-according to Genesis-made in His 
image. We have the semi-divine capacity for consciousness. Our consciousness 
participates in the speaking forth of Being. We are low-resolution ("kenotic") versions of 


57 


God. We can make order from chaos-and vice versa-in our way, with our words. So, we 
may not exactly be God, but we're not exactly nothing, either. 

In my own periods of darkness, in the underworld of the soul, I find myself frequently 
overcome and amazed by the ability of people to befriend each other, to love their 
intimate partners and parents and children, and to do what they must do to keep the 
machinery of the world running. I knew a man, injured and disabled by a car accident, 
who was employed by a local utility. For years after the crash he worked side by side with 
another man, who for his part suffered with a degenerative neurological disease. They 
cooperated while repairing the lines, each making up for the other's inadequacy. This sort 
of everyday heroism is the rule, I believe, rather than the exception. Most individuals are 
dealing with one or more serious health problems while going productively and 
uncomplainingly about their business. If anyone is fortunate enough to be in a rare period 
of grace and health, personally, then he or she typically has at least one close family 
member in crisis. Yet people prevail and continue to do difficult and effortful tasks to 
hold themselves and their families and society together. To me this is miraculous-so 
much so that a dumbfounded gratitude is the only appropriate response. There are so 
many ways that things can fall apart, or fail to work altogether, and it is always wounded 
people who are holding it together. They deserve some genuine and heartfelt admiration 
for that. It's an ongoing miracle of fortitude and perseverance. 

In my clinical practice I encourage people to credit themselves and those around them 
for acting productively and with care, as well as for the genuine concern and 
thoughtfulness they manifest towards others. People are so tortured by the limitations 
and constraint of Being that I am amazed they ever act properly or look beyond 
themselves at all. But enough do so that we have central heat and running water and 
infinite computational power and electricity and enough for everyone to eat and even the 
capacity to contemplate the fate of broader society and nature, terrible nature, itself. All 
that complex machinery that protects us from freezing and starving and dying from lack 
of water tends unceasingly towards malfunction through entropy, and it is only the 
constant attention of careful people that keeps it working so unbelievably well. Some 
people degenerate into the hell of resentment and the hatred of Being, but most refuse to 
do so, despite their suffering and disappointments and losses and inadequacies and 
ugliness, and again that is a miracle for those with the eyes to see it. 

Humanity, in toto, and those who compose it as identifiable people deserve some 
sympathy for the appalling burden under which the human individual genuinely staggers; 
some sympathy for subjugation to mortal vulnerability, tyranny of the state, and the 
depredations of nature. It is an existential situation that no mere animal encounters or 
endures, and one of severity such that it would take a God to fully bear it. It is this 
sympathy that should be the proper medicament for self-conscious self-contempt, which 
has its justification, but is only half the full and proper story. Hatred for self and mankind 
must be balanced with gratefulness for tradition and the state and astonishment at what 
normal, everyday people accomplish-to say nothing of the staggering achievements of 
the truly remarkable. 

We deserve some respect. You deserve some respect. You are important to other 
people, as much as to yourself. You have some vital role to play in the unfolding destiny 
of the world. You are, therefore, morally obliged to take care of yourself. You should take 
care of, help and be good to yourself the same way you would take care of, help and be 
good to someone you loved and valued. You may therefore have to conduct yourself 
habitually in a manner that allows you some respect for your own Being-and fair 
enough. But every person is deeply flawed. Everyone falls short of the glory of God. If that 
stark fact meant, however, that we had no responsibility to care, for ourselves as much as 
others, everyone would be brutally punished all the time. That would not be good. That 


58 



would make the shortcomings of the world, which can make everyone who thinks 
honestly question the very propriety of the world, worse in every way. That simply cannot 
be the proper path forward. 

To treat yourself as if you were someone you are responsible for helping is, instead, to 
consider what would be truly good for you. This is not "what you want." It is also not 
"what would make you happy." Every time you give a child something sweet, you make 
that child happy. That does not mean that you should do nothing for children except feed 
them candy. "Happy" is by no means synonymous with "good." You must get children to 
brush their teeth. They must put on their snowsuits when they go outside in the cold, 
even though they might object strenuously. You must help a child become a virtuous, 
responsible, awake being, capable of full reciprocity-able to take care of himself and 
others, and to thrive while doing so. Why would you think it acceptable to do anything 
less for yourself? 

You need to consider the future and think, "What might my life look like if I were 
caring for myself properly? What career would challenge me and render me productive 
and helpful, so that I could shoulder my share of the load, and enjoy the consequences? 
What should I be doing, when I have some freedom, to improve my health, expand my 
knowledge, and strengthen my body?" You need to know where you are, so you can start 
to chart your course. You need to know who you are, so that you understand your 
armament and bolster yourself in respect to your limitations. You need to know where 
you are going, so that you can limit the extent of chaos in your life, restructure order, and 
bring the divine force of Hope to bear on the world. 

You must determine where you are going, so that you can bargain for yourself, so that 
you don't end up resentful, vengeful and cruel. You have to articulate your own 
principles, so that you can defend yourself against others' taking inappropriate advantage 
of you, and so that you are secure and safe while you work and play. You must discipline 
yourself carefully. You must keep the promises you make to yourself, and reward yourself, 
so that you can trust and motivate yourself. You need to determine how to act toward 
yourself so that you are most likely to become and to stay a good person. It would be 
good to make the world a better place. Heaven, after all, will not arrive of its own accord. 
We will have to work to bring it about, and strengthen ourselves, so that we can 
withstand the deadly angels and flaming sword of judgment that God used to bar its 
entrance. 

Don't underestimate the power of vision and direction. These are irresistible forces, 
able to transform what might appear to be unconquerable obstacles into traversable 
pathways and expanding opportunities. Strengthen the individual. Start with yourself. 
Take care with yourself. Define who you are. Refine your personality. Choose your 
destination and articulate your Being. As the great nineteenth-century German 
philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche so brilliantly noted, "He whose life has a why can bear 
almost any how."- 

You could help direct the world, on its careening trajectory, a bit more toward Heaven 
and a bit more away from Hell. Once having understood Hell, researched it, so to speak- 
particularly your own individual Hell-you could decide against going there or creating 
that. You could aim elsewhere. You could, in fact, devote your life to this. That would 
give you a Meaning, with a capital M. That would justify your miserable existence. That 
would atone for your sinful nature, and replace your shame and self-consciousness with 
the natural pride and forthright confidence of someone who has learned once again to 
walk with God in the Garden. 

You could begin by treating yourself as if you were someone you were responsible for 
helping. 


59 


/** 

VS 


60 







a 


62 


RULE 3 


MAKE FRIENDS WITH PEOPLE WHO WANT THE BEST FOR 

YOU 


THE OLD HOMETOWN 

The town I grew up in had been scraped only fifty years earlier out of the endless flat 
Northern prairie. Fairview, Alberta, was part of the frontier, and had the cowboy bars to 
prove it. The Hudson's Bay Co. department store on Main Street still bought beaver, wolf 
and coyote furs directly from the local trappers. Three thousand people lived there, four 
hundred miles away from the nearest city. Cable TV, video games and internet did not 
exist. It was no easy matter to stay innocently amused in Fairview, particularly during the 
five months of winter, when long stretches of forty-below days and even colder nights 
were the norm. 

The world is a different place when it's cold like that. The drunks in our town ended 
their sad lives early. They passed out in snowbanks at three in the morning and froze to 
death. You don't go outside casually when it's forty below. On first breath, the arid desert 
air constricts your lungs. Ice forms on your eyelashes and they stick together. Long hair, 
wet from the shower, freezes solid and then stands on end wraith-like of its own accord 
later in a warm house, when it thaws bone dry, charged with electricity. Children only put 
their tongues on steel playground equipment once. Smoke from house chimneys doesn't 
rise. Defeated by the cold, it drifts downwards, and collects like fog on snow-covered 
rooftops and yards. Cars must be plugged in at night, their engines warmed by block 
heaters, or oil will not flow through them in the morning, and they won't start. 
Sometimes they won't anyway. Then you turn the engine over pointlessly until the starter 
clatters and falls silent. Then you remove the frozen battery from the car, loosening bolts 
with stiffening fingers in the intense cold, and bring it into the house. It sits there, 
sweating for hours, until it warms enough to hold a decent charge. You are not going to 
see out of the back window of your car, either. It frosts over in November and stays that 
way until May. Scraping it off just dampens the upholstery. Then it's frozen, too. Late one 
night going to visit a friend I sat for two hours on the edge of the passenger seat in a 1970 
Dodge Challenger, jammed up against the stick-shift, using a vodka-soaked rag to keep 
the inside of the front windshield clear in front of the driver because the car heater had 
quit. Stopping wasn't an option. There was nowhere to stop. 

And it was hell on house cats. Felines in Fairview had short ears and tails because they 
had lost the tips of both to frostbite. They came to resemble Arctic foxes, which evolved 
those features to deal proactively with the intense cold. One day our cat got outside and 
no one noticed. We found him, later, fur frozen fast to the cold hard backdoor cement 
steps where he sat. We carefully separated cat from concrete, with no lasting damage- 
except to his pride. Fairview cats were also at great risk in the winter from cars, but not 
for the reasons you think. It wasn't automobiles sliding on icy roads and running them 
over. Only loser cats died that way. It was cars parked immediately after being driven that 
were dangerous. A frigid cat might think highly of climbing up under such a vehicle and 
sitting on its still-warm engine block. But what if the driver decided to use the car again, 
before the engine cooled down and cat departed? Let's just say that heat-seeking house- 
pets and rapidly rotating radiator fans do not coexist happily. 

Because we were so far north, the bitterly cold winters were also very dark. By 
December, the sun didn't rise until 9:30 a.m. We trudged to school in the pitch black. It 


63 



wasn't much lighter when we walked home, just before the early sunset. There wasn't 
much for young people to do in Fairview, even in the summer. But the winters were 
worse. Then your friends mattered. More than anything. 

My Friend Chris and His Cousin 

I had a friend at that time. We'll call him Chris. He was a smart guy. He read a lot. He 
liked science fiction of the kind I was attracted to (Bradbury, Heinlein, Clarke). He was 
inventive. He was interested in electronic kits and gears and motors. He was a natural 
engineer. All this was overshadowed, however, by something that had gone wrong in his 
family. I don't know what it was. His sisters were smart and his father was soft-spoken 
and his mother was kind. The girls seemed OK. But Chris had been left unattended to in 
some important way. Despite his intelligence and curiosity he was angry, resentful and 
without hope. 

All this manifested itself in material form in the shape of his 1972 blue Ford pickup 
truck. That notorious vehicle had at least one dent in every quarter panel of its damaged 
external body. Worse, it had an equivalent number of dents inside. Those were produced 
by the impact of the body parts of friends against the internal surfaces during the 
continual accidents that resulted in the outer dents. Chris's truck was the exoskeleton of 
a nihilist. It had the perfect bumper sticker: Be Alert-The World Needs More Lerts. The 
irony it produced in combination with the dents elevated it nicely to theatre of the 
absurd. Very little of that was (so to speak) accidental. 

Every time Chris crashed his truck, his father would fix it, and buy him something else. 
He had a motorbike and a van for selling ice cream. He did not care for his motorbike. He 
sold no ice cream. He often expressed dissatisfaction with his father and their 
relationship. But his dad was older and unwell, diagnosed with an illness only after many 
years. He didn't have the energy he should have. Maybe he couldn't pay enough attention 
to his son. Maybe that's all it took to fracture their relationship. 

Chris had a cousin, Ed, who was about two years younger. I liked him, as much as you 
can like the younger cousin of a teenage friend. He was a tall, smart, charming, good- 
looking kid. He was witty, too. You would have predicted a good future for him, had you 
met him when he was twelve. But Ed drifted slowly downhill, into a dropout, semi- 
drifting mode of existence. He didn't get as angry as Chris, but he was just as confused. If 
you knew Ed's friends, you might say that it was peer pressure that set him on his 
downward path. But his peers weren't obviously any more lost or delinquent than he was, 
although they were generally somewhat less bright. It was also the case that Ed's-and 
Chris's-situation did not appear particularly improved by their discovery of marijuana. 
Marijuana isn't bad for everyone any more than alcohol is bad for everyone. Sometimes it 
even appears to improve people. But it didn't improve Ed. It didn't improve Chris, either. 

To amuse ourselves in the long nights, Chris and I and Ed and the rest of the teenagers 
drove around and around in our 1970s cars and pickup trucks. We cruised down Main 
Street, along Railroad Avenue, up past the high school, around the north end of town, 
over to the west-or up Main Street, around the north end of town, over to the east-and 
so on, endlessly repeating the theme. If we weren't driving in town, we were driving in 
the countryside. A century earlier, surveyors had laid out a vast grid across the entire 
three-hundred-thousand-square-mile expanse of the great western prairie. Every two 
miles north, a plowed gravel road stretched forever, east to west. Every mile west, another 
travelled north and south. We never ran out of roads. 

Teenage Wasteland 


64 



If we weren't circling around town and countryside we were at a party. Some relatively 
young adult (or some relatively creepy older adult) would open his house to friends. It 
would then become temporary home to all manner of party crashers, many of whom 
started out seriously undesirable or quickly become that way when drinking. A party 
might also happen accidentally, when some teenager's unwitting parents had left town. In 
that case, the occupants of the cars or trucks always cruising around would notice house 
lights on, but household car absent. This was not good. Things could get seriously out of 
hand. 

I did not like teenage parties. I do not remember them nostalgically. They were dismal 
affairs. The lights were kept low. That kept self-consciousness to a minimum. The over- 
loud music made conversation impossible. There was little to talk about in any case. 
There were always a couple of the town psychopaths attending. Everybody drank and 
smoked too much. A dreary and oppressive sense of aimlessness hung over such 
occasions, and nothing ever happened (unless you count the time my too-quiet classmate 
drunkenly began to brandish his fully-loaded 12-gauge shotgun, or the time the girl I later 
married contemptuously insulted someone while he threatened her with a knife, or the 
time another friend climbed a large tree, swung out on a branch, and crashed flat onto his 
back, half dead right beside the campfire we had started at its base, followed precisely one 
minute later by his halfwit sidekick). 

No one knew what the hell they were doing at those parties. Hoping for a cheerleader? 
Waiting for Godot? Although the former would have been immediately preferred 
(although cheerleading squads were scarce in our town), the latter was closer to the 
truth. It would be more romantic, I suppose, to suggest that we would have all jumped at 
the chance for something more productive, bored out of our skulls as we were. But it's 
not true. We were all too prematurely cynical and world-weary and leery of responsibility 
to stick to the debating clubs and Air Cadets and school sports that the adults around us 
tried to organize. Doing anything wasn't cool. I don't know what teenage life was like 
before the revolutionaries of the late sixties advised everyone young to tune in, turn on 
and drop out. Was it OK for a teenager to belong wholeheartedly to a club in 1955? 
Because it certainly wasn't twenty years later. Plenty of us turned on and dropped out. 
But not so many tuned in. 

I wanted to be elsewhere. I wasn't the only one. Everyone who eventually left the 
Fairview I grew up in knew they were leaving by the age of twelve. I knew. My wife, who 
grew up with me on the street our families shared, knew. The friends I had who did and 
didn't leave also knew, regardless of which track they were on. There was an unspoken 
expectation in the families of those who were college-bound that such a thing was a 
matter of course. For those from less-educated families, a future that included university 
was simply not part of the conceptual realm. It wasn't for lack of money, either. Tuition 
for advanced education was very low at that time, and jobs in Alberta were plentiful and 
high-paying. I earned more money in 1980 working at a plywood mill than I would again 
doing anything else for twenty years. No one missed out on university because of financial 
need in oil-rich Alberta in the 1970s. 

Some Different Friends-and Some More of the Same 

In high school, after my first group of cronies had all dropped out, I made friends with a 
couple of newcomers. They came to Fairview as boarders. There was no school after ninth 
grade in their even more remote and aptly named hometown, Bear Canyon. They were an 
ambitious duo, comparatively speaking; straightforward and reliable, but also cool and 
very amusing. When I left town to attend Grande Prairie Regional College, ninety miles 
away, one of them became my roommate. The other went off elsewhere to pursue further 
education. Both were aiming upward. Their decisions to do so bolstered mine. 


65 



I was a happy clam when I arrived at college. I found another, expanded group of like- 
minded companions, whom my Bear Canyon comrade also joined. We were all captivated 
by literature and philosophy. We ran the Student Union. We made it profitable, for the 
first time in its history, hosting college dances. How can you lose money selling beer to 
college kids? We started a newspaper. We got to know our professors of political science 
and biology and English literature in the tiny seminars that characterized even our first 
year. The instructors were thankful for our enthusiasm and taught us well. We were 
building a better life. 

I sloughed off a lot of my past. In a small town, everyone knows who you are. You drag 
your years behind you like a running dog with tin cans tied to its tail. You can't escape 
who you have been. Everything wasn't online then, and thank God for that, but it was 
stored equally indelibly in everyone's spoken and unspoken expectations and memory. 

When you move, everything is up in the air, at least for a while. It's stressful, but in the 
chaos there are new possibilities. People, including you, can't hem you in with their old 
notions. You get shaken out of your ruts. You can make new, better ruts, with people 
aiming at better things. I thought this was just a natural development. I thought that 
every person who moved would have-and want-the same phoenix-like experience. But 
that wasn't always the case. 

One time, when I was about fifteen, I went with Chris and another friend, Carl, to 
Edmonton, a city of six hundred thousand. Carl had never been to a city. This was not 
uncommon. Fairview to Edmonton was an eight-hundred-mile round trip. I had done it 
many times, sometimes with my parents, sometimes without. I liked the anonymity that 
the city provided. I liked the new beginnings. I liked the escape from the dismal, cramped 
adolescent culture of my home town. So, I convinced my two friends to make the journey. 
But they did not have the same experience. As soon as we arrived, Chris and Carl wanted 
to buy some pot. We headed for the parts of Edmonton that were exactly like the worst of 
Fairview. We found the same furtive street-vending marijuana providers. We spent the 
weekend drinking in the hotel room. Although we had travelled a long distance, we had 
gone nowhere at all. 

I saw an even more egregious example of this a few years later. I had moved to 
Edmonton to finish my undergraduate degree. I took an apartment with my sister, who 
was studying to be a nurse. She was also an up-and-out-of-there person. (Not too many 
years later she would plant strawberries in Norway and run safaris through Africa and 
smuggle trucks across the Tuareg-menaced Sahara Desert, and babysit orphan gorillas in 
the Congo.) We had a nice place in a new high-rise, overlooking the broad valley of the 
North Saskatchewan River. We had a view of the city skyline in the background. I bought 
a beautiful new Yamaha upright piano, in a fit of enthusiasm. The place looked good. 

I heard through the grapevine that Ed-Chris's younger cousin-had moved to the city. 
I thought that was a good thing. One day he called. I invited him over. I wanted to see 
how he was faring. I hoped he was achieving some of the potential I once saw in him. 
That is not what happened. Ed showed up, older, balder and stooped. He was a lot more 
not-doing-so-well young adult and a lot less youthful possibility. His eyes were the 
telltale red slits of the practised stoner. Ed had had taken some job-lawn-mowing and 
casual landscaping-which would have been fine for a part-time university student or for 
someone who could not do better but which was wretchedly low-end as a career for an 
intelligent person. 

He was accompanied by a friend. 

It was his friend I really remember. He was spaced. He was baked. He was stoned out of 
his gourd. His head and our nice, civilized apartment did not easily occupy the same 
universe. My sister was there. She knew Ed. She'd seen this sort of thing before. But I still 
wasn't happy that Ed had brought this character into our place. Ed sat down. His friend 


66 



sat down, too, although it wasn't clear he noticed. It was tragicomedy. Stoned as he was, 
Ed still had the sense to be embarrassed. We sipped our beer. Ed's friend looked upwards. 
"My particles are scattered all over the ceiling," he managed. Truer words were never 
spoken. 

I took Ed aside and told him politely that he had to leave. I said that he shouldn't have 
brought his useless bastard of a companion. He nodded. He understood. That made it 
even worse. His older cousin Chris wrote me a letter much later about such things. I 
included it in my first book, Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief published in 1999: 
"I had friends," he said. - "Before. Anyone with enough self-contempt that they could 
forgive me mine." 

What was it that made Chris and Carl and Ed unable (or, worse, perhaps, unwilling) to 
move or to change their friendships and improve the circumstances of their lives? Was it 
inevitable-a consequence of their own limitations, nascent illnesses and traumas of the 
past? After all, people vary significantly, in ways that seem both structural and 
deterministic. People differ in intelligence, which is in large part the ability to learn and 
transform. People have very different personalities, as well. Some are active, and some 
passive. Others are anxious or calm. For every individual driven to achieve, there is 
another who is indolent. The degree to which these differences are immutably part and 
parcel of someone is greater than an optimist might presume or desire. And then there is 
illness, mental and physical, diagnosed or invisible, further limiting or shaping our lives. 

Chris had a psychotic break in his thirties, after flirting with insanity for many years. 
Not long afterward, he committed suicide. Did his heavy marijuana use play a magnifying 
role, or was it understandable self-medication? Use of physician-prescribed drugs for pain 
has, after all, decreased in marijuana-legal states such as Colorado. Maybe the pot made 
things better for Chris, not worse. Maybe it eased his suffering, instead of exacerbating 
his instability. Was it the nihilistic philosophy he nurtured that paved the way to his 
eventual breakdown? Was that nihilism, in turn, a consequence of genuine ill health, or 
just an intellectual rationalization of his unwillingness to dive responsibly into life? Why 
did he-like his cousin, like my other friends-continually choose people who, and places 
that, were not good for him? 

Sometimes, when people have a low opinion of their own worth-or, perhaps, when 
they refuse responsibility for their lives-they choose a new acquaintance, of precisely the 
type who proved troublesome in the past. Such people don't believe that they deserve any 
better-so they don't go looking for it. Or, perhaps, they don't want the trouble of better. 
Freud called this a "repetition compulsion." He thought of it as an unconscious drive to 
repeat the horrors of the past-sometimes, perhaps, to formulate those horrors more 
precisely, sometimes to attempt more active mastery and sometimes, perhaps, because no 
alternatives beckon. People create their worlds with the tools they have directly at hand. 
Faulty tools produce faulty results. Repeated use of the same faulty tools produces the 
same faulty results. It is in this manner that those who fail to learn from the past doom 
themselves to repeat it. It's partly fate. It's partly inability. It's partly ... unwillingness to 
learn? Refusal to learn? Motivated refusal to learn? 

Rescuing the Damned 

People choose friends who aren't good for them for other reasons, too. Sometimes it's 
because they want to rescue someone. This is more typical of young people, although the 
impetus still exists among older folks who are too agreeable or have remained naive or 
who are willfully blind. Someone might object, "It is only right to see the best in people. 
The highest virtue is the desire to help." But not everyone who is failing is a victim, and 
not everyone at the bottom wishes to rise, although many do, and many manage it. 


67 


Nonetheless, people will often accept or even amplify their own suffering, as well as that 
of others, if they can brandish it as evidence of the world's injustice. There is no shortage 
of oppressors among the downtrodden, even if, given their lowly positions, many of them 
are only tyrannical wannabes. It's the easiest path to choose, moment to moment, 
although it's nothing but hell in the long run. 

Imagine someone not doing well. He needs help. He might even want it. But it is not 
easy to distinguish between someone truly wanting and needing help and someone who is 
merely exploiting a willing helper. The distinction is difficult even for the person who is 
wanting and needing and possibly exploiting. The person who tries and fails, and is 
forgiven, and then tries again and fails, and is forgiven, is also too often the person who 
wants everyone to believe in the authenticity of all that trying. 

When it's not just naivete, the attempt to rescue someone is often fuelled by vanity and 
narcissism. Something like this is detailed in the incomparable Russian author Fyodor 
Dostoevsky's bitter classic, Notes from Underground, which begins with these famous lines: 
"I am a sick man ... I am a spiteful man. I am an unattractive man. I believe my liver is 
diseased." It is the confession of a miserable, arrogant sojourner in the underworld of 
chaos and despair. He analyzes himself mercilessly, but only pays in this manner for a 
hundred sins, despite committing a thousand. Then, imagining himself redeemed, the 
underground man commits the worst transgression of the lot. He offers aid to a genuinely 
unfortunate person, Liza, a woman on the desperate nineteenth-century road to 
prostitution. He invites her for a visit, promising to set her life back on the proper course. 
While waiting for her to appear, his fantasies spin increasingly messianic: 

One day passed, however, another and another; she did not come and I began to grow calmer. I felt particularly 
bold and cheerful after nine o'clock, I even sometimes began dreaming, and rather sweetly: I, for instance, 
became the salvation of Liza, simply through her coming to me and my talking to her.... I develop her, educate 
her. Finally, I notice that she loves me, loves me passionately. I pretend not to understand (I don't know, 
however, why I pretend, just for effect, perhaps). At last all confusion, transfigured, trembling and sobbing, she 
flings herself at my feet and says that 1 am her savior, and that she loves me better than anything in the world. 

Nothing but the narcissism of the underground man is nourished by such fantasies. 
Liza herself is demolished by them. The salvation he offers to her demands far more in 
the way of commitment and maturity than the underground man is willing or able to 
offer. He simply does not have the character to see it through-something he quickly 
realizes, and equally quickly rationalizes. Liza eventually arrives at his shabby apartment, 
hoping desperately for a way out, staking everything she has on the visit. She tells the 
underground man that she wants to leave her current life. His response? 

"Why have you come to me, tell me that, please?" 1 began, gasping for breath and regardless of logical 
connection in my words. I longed to have it all out at once, at one burst; 1 did not even trouble how to begin. 

"Why have you come? Answer, answer," I cried, hardly knowing what I was doing. "I'll tell you, my good girl, 
why you have come. You've come because I talked sentimental stuff to you then. So now you are soft as butter 
and longing for fine sentiments again. So you may as well know that I was laughing at you then. And I am 
laughing at you now. Why are you shuddering? Yes, I was laughing at you! I had been insulted just before, at 
dinner, by the fellows who came that evening before me. I came to you, meaning to thrash one of them, an 
officer; but I didn't succeed, I didn't find him; I had to avenge the insult on someone to get back my own again; 
you turned up, I vented my spleen on you and laughed at you. I had been humiliated, so I wanted to humiliate; I 
had been treated like a rag, so I wanted to show my power.... That's what it was, and you imagined I had come 
there on purpose to save you. Yes? You imagined that? You imagined that?" 

I knew that she would perhaps be muddled and not take it all in exactly, but I knew, too, that she would 
grasp the gist of it, very well indeed. And so, indeed, she did. She turned white as a handkerchief, tried to say 
something, and her lips worked painfully; but she sank on a chair as though she had been felled by an axe. And 
all the time afterwards she listened to me with her lips parted and her eyes wide open, shuddering with awful 
terror. The cynicism, the cynicism of my words overwhelmed her.... 

The inflated self-importance, carelessness and sheer malevolence of the underground man 
dashes Liza's last hopes. He understands this well. Worse: something in him was aiming 
at this all along. And he knows that too. But a villain who despairs of his villainy has not 
become a hero. A hero is something positive, not just the absence of evil. 


68 



But Christ himself, you might object, befriended tax-collectors and prostitutes. How 
dare I cast aspersions on the motives of those who are trying to help? But Christ was the 
archetypal perfect man. And you're you. How do you know that your attempts to pull 
someone up won't instead bring them-or you-further down? Imagine the case of 
someone supervising an exceptional team of workers, all of them striving towards a 
collectively held goal; imagine them hard-working, brilliant, creative and unified. But the 
person supervising is also responsible for someone troubled, who is performing poorly, 
elsewhere. In a fit of inspiration, the well-meaning manager moves that problematic 
person into the midst of his stellar team, hoping to improve him by example. What 
happens?-and the psychological literature is clear on this point. Does the errant 
interloper immediately straighten up and fly right? No. Instead, the entire team 
degenerates. The newcomer remains cynical, arrogant and neurotic. He complains. He 
shirks. He misses important meetings. His low-quality work causes delays, and must be 
redone by others. He still gets paid, however, just like his teammates. The hard workers 
who surround him start to feel betrayed. "Why am I breaking myself into pieces striving 
to finish this project," each thinks, "when my new team member never breaks a sweat?" 
The same thing happens when well-meaning counsellors place a delinquent teen among 
comparatively civilized peers. The delinquency spreads, not the stability. Down is a lot 
easier than up. 

Maybe you are saving someone because you're a strong, generous, well-put-together 
person who wants to do the right thing. But it's also possible-and, perhaps, more likely 
-that you just want to draw attention to your inexhaustible reserves of compassion and 
good-will. Or maybe you're saving someone because you want to convince yourself that 
the strength of your character is more than just a side effect of your luck and birthplace. 
Or maybe it's because it's easier to look virtuous when standing alongside someone 
utterly irresponsible. 

Assume first that you are doing the easiest thing, and not the most difficult. 

Your raging alcoholism makes my binge drinking appear trivial. My long serious talks 
with you about your badly failing marriage convince both of us that you are doing 
everything possible and that I am helping you to my utmost. It looks like effort. It looks 
like progress. But real improvement would require far more from both of you. Are you so 
sure the person crying out to be saved has not decided a thousand times to accept his lot 
of pointless and worsening suffering, simply because it is easier than shouldering any true 
responsibility? Are you enabling a delusion? Is it possible that your contempt would be 
more salutary than your pity? 

Or maybe you have no plan, genuine or otherwise, to rescue anybody. You're 
associating with people who are bad for you not because it's better for anyone, but 
because it's easier. You know it. Your friends know it. You're all bound by an implicit 
contract-one aimed at nihilism, and failure, and suffering of the stupidest sort. You've 
all decided to sacrifice the future to the present. You don't talk about it. You don't all get 
together and say, "Let's take the easier path. Let's indulge in whatever the moment might 
bring. And let's agree, further, not to call each other on it. That way, we can more easily 
forget what we are doing." You don't mention any of that. But you all know what's really 
going on. 

Before you help someone, you should find out why that person is in trouble. You 
shouldn't merely assume that he or she is a noble victim of unjust circumstances and 
exploitation. It's the most unlikely explanation, not the most probable. In my experience 
-clinical and otherwise-it's just never been that simple. Besides, if you buy the story 
that everything terrible just happened on its own, with no personal responsibility on the 
part of the victim, you deny that person all agency in the past (and, by implication, in the 
present and future, as well). In this manner, you strip him or her of all power. 


69 


It is far more likely that a given individual has just decided to reject the path upward, 
because of its difficulty. Perhaps that should even be your default assumption, when faced 
with such a situation. That's too harsh, you think. You might be right. Maybe that's a 
step too far. But consider this: failure is easy to understand. No explanation for its 
existence is required. In the same manner, fear, hatred, addiction, promiscuity, betrayal 
and deception require no explanation. It's not the existence of vice, or the indulgence in 
it, that requires explanation. Vice is easy. Failure is easy, too. It's easier not to shoulder a 
burden. It's easier not to think, and not to do, and not to care. It's easier to put off until 
tomorrow what needs to be done today, and drown the upcoming months and years in 
today's cheap pleasures. As the infamous father of the Simpson clan puts it, immediately 
prior to downing a jar of mayonnaise and vodka, "That's a problem for Future Homer. 
Man, I don't envy that guy!"- 

How do I know that your suffering is not the demand of martyrdom for my resources, 
so that you can oh-so-momentarily stave off the inevitable? Maybe you have even moved 
beyond caring about the impending collapse, but don't yet want to admit it. Maybe my 
help won't rectify anything-can't rectify anything-but it does keep that too-terrible, 
too-personal realization temporarily at bay. Maybe your misery is a demand placed on me 
so that I fail too, so that the gap you so painfully feel between us can be reduced, while 
you degenerate and sink. How do I know that you would refuse to play such a game? How 
do I know that I am not myself merely pretending to be responsible, while pointlessly 
"helping" you, so that I don't have to do something truly difficult-and genuinely 
possible? 

Maybe your misery is the weapon you brandish in your hatred for those who rose 
upward while you waited and sank. Maybe your misery is your attempt to prove the 
world's injustice, instead of the evidence of your own sin, your own missing of the mark, 
your conscious refusal to strive and to live. Maybe your willingness to suffer in failure is 
inexhaustible, given what you use that suffering to prove. Maybe it's your revenge on 
Being. How exactly should I befriend you when you're in such a place? How exactly could 
I? 

Success: that's the mystery. Virtue: that's what's inexplicable. To fail, you merely have 
to cultivate a few bad habits. You just have to bide your time. And once someone has 
spent enough time cultivating bad habits and biding their time, they are much 
diminished. Much of what they could have been has dissipated, and much of the less that 
they have become is now real. Things fall apart, of their own accord, but the sins of men 
speed their degeneration. And then comes the flood. 

I am not saying that there is no hope of redemption. But it is much harder to extract 
someone from a chasm than to lift him from a ditch. And some chasms are very deep. 
And there's not much left of the body at the bottom. 

Maybe I should at least wait, to help you, until it's clear that you want to be helped. 
Carl Rogers, the famous humanistic psychologist, believed it was impossible to start a 
therapeutic relationship if the person seeking help did not want to improve. Rogers 
believed it was impossible to convince someone to change for the better. The desire to 
improve was, instead, the precondition for progress. I've had court-mandated 
psychotherapy clients. They did not want my help. They were forced to seek it. It did not 
work. It was a travesty. 

If I stay in an unhealthy relationship with you, perhaps it's because I'm too weak-willed 
and indecisive to leave, but I don't want to know it. Thus, I continue helping you, and 
console myself with my pointless martyrdom. Maybe I can then conclude, about myself, 
"Someone that self-sacrificing, that willing to help someone-that has to be a good 
person." Not so. It might be just a person trying to look good pretending to solve what 


70 


appears to be a difficult problem instead of actually being good and addressing something 
real. 

Maybe instead of continuing our friendship I should just go off somewhere, get my act 
together, and lead by example. 

And none of this is a justification for abandoning those in real need to pursue your 
narrow, blind ambition, in case it has to be said. 

A Reciprocal Arrangement 

Here's something to consider: If you have a friend whose friendship you wouldn't 
recommend to your sister, or your father, or your son, why would you have such a friend 
for yourself? You might say: out of loyalty. Well, loyalty is not identical to stupidity. 
Loyalty must be negotiated, fairly and honestly. Friendship is a reciprocal arrangement. 
You are not morally obliged to support someone who is making the world a worse place. 
Quite the opposite. You should choose people who want things to be better, not worse. 
It's a good thing, not a selfish thing, to choose people who are good for you. It's 
appropriate and praiseworthy to associate with people whose lives would be improved if 
they saw your life improve. 

If you surround yourself with people who support your upward aim, they will not 
tolerate your cynicism and destructiveness. They will instead encourage you when you do 
good for yourself and others and punish you carefully when you do not. This will help 
bolster your resolve to do what you should do, in the most appropriate and careful 
manner. People who are not aiming up will do the opposite. They will offer a former 
smoker a cigarette and a former alcoholic a beer. They will become jealous when you 
succeed, or do something pristine. They will withdraw their presence or support, or 
actively punish you for it. They will over-ride your accomplishment with a past action, 
real or imaginary, of their own. Maybe they are trying to test you, to see if your resolve is 
real, to see if you are genuine. But mostly they are dragging you down because your new 
improvements cast their faults in an even dimmer light. 

It is for this reason that every good example is a fateful challenge, and every hero, a 
judge. Michelangelo's great perfect marble David cries out to its observer: "You could be 
more than you are." When you dare aspire upward, you reveal the inadequacy of the 
present and the promise of the future. Then you disturb others, in the depths of their 
souls, where they understand that their cynicism and immobility are unjustifiable. You 
play Abel to their Cain. You remind them that they ceased caring not because of life's 
horrors, which are undeniable, but because they do not want to lift the world up on to 
their shoulders, where it belongs. 

Don't think that it is easier to surround yourself with good healthy people than with 
bad unhealthy people. It's not. A good, healthy person is an ideal. It requires strength and 
daring to stand up near such a person. Have some humility. Have some courage. Use your 
judgment, and protect yourself from too-uncritical compassion and pity. 

Make friends with people who want the best for you. 


71 




72 



a 


73 


RULE 4 


COMPARE YOURSELF TO WHO YOU WERE YESTERDAY, NOT 
TO WHO SOMEONE ELSE IS TODAY 


THE INTERNAL CRITIC 

It was easier for people to be good at something when more of us lived in small, rural 
communities. Someone could be homecoming queen. Someone else could be spelling-bee 
champ, math whiz or basketball star. There were only one or two mechanics and a couple 
of teachers. In each of their domains, these local heroes had the opportunity to enjoy the 
serotonin-fuelled confidence of the victor. It may be for that reason that people who were 
born in small towns are statistically overrepresented among the eminent. If you're one 
in a million now, but originated in modern New York, there's twenty of you-and most of 
us now live in cities. What's more, we have become digitally connected to the entire 
seven billion. Our hierarchies of accomplishment are now dizzyingly vertical. 

No matter how good you are at something, or how you rank your accomplishments, 
there is someone out there who makes you look incompetent. You're a decent guitar 
player, but you're not Jimmy Page or Jack White. You're almost certainly not even going 
to rock your local pub. You're a good cook, but there are many great chefs. Your mother's 
recipe for fish heads and rice, no matter how celebrated in her village of origin, doesn't 
cut it in these days of grapefruit foam and Scotch/tobacco ice-cream. Some Mafia don has 
a tackier yacht. Some obsessive CEO has a more complicated self-winding watch, kept in 
his more valuable mechanical hardwood-and-steel automatic self-winding watch case. 
Even the most stunning Hollywood actress eventually transforms into the Evil Queen, on 
eternal, paranoid watch for the new Snow White. And you? Your career is boring and 
pointless, your housekeeping skills are second-rate, your taste is appalling, you're fatter 
than your friends, and everyone dreads your parties. Who cares if you are prime minister 
of Canada when someone else is the president of the United States? 

Inside us dwells a critical internal voice and spirit that knows all this. It's predisposed 
to make its noisy case. It condemns our mediocre efforts. It can be very difficult to quell. 
Worse, critics of its sort are necessary. There is no shortage of tasteless artists, tuneless 
musicians, poisonous cooks, bureaucratically-personality-disordered middle managers, 
hack novelists and tedious, ideology-ridden professors. Things and people differ 
importantly in their qualities. Awful music torments listeners everywhere. Poorly 
designed buildings crumble in earthquakes. Substandard automobiles kill their drivers 
when they crash. Failure is the price we pay for standards and, because mediocrity has 
consequences both real and harsh, standards are necessary. 

We are not equal in ability or outcome, and never will be. A very small number of 
people produce very much of everything. The winners don't take all, but they take most, 
and the bottom is not a good place to be. People are unhappy at the bottom. They get sick 
there, and remain unknown and unloved. They waste their lives there. They die there. In 
consequence, the self-denigrating voice in the minds of people weaves a devastating tale. 
Life is a zero-sum game. Worthlessness is the default condition. What but willful 
blindness could possibly shelter people from such withering criticism? It is for such 
reasons that a whole generation of social psychologists recommended "positive illusions" 
as the only reliable route to mental health. Their credo? Let a lie be your umbrella. A 
more dismal, wretched, pessimistic philosophy can hardly be imagined: things are so 
terrible that only delusion can save you. 


74 


Here is an alternative approach (and one that requires no illusions). If the cards are 
always stacked against you, perhaps the game you are playing is somehow rigged (perhaps 
by you, unbeknownst to yourself). If the internal voice makes you doubt the value of your 
endeavours-or your life, or life itself-perhaps you should stop listening. If the critical 
voice within says the same denigrating things about everyone, no matter how successful, 
how reliable can it be? Maybe its comments are chatter, not wisdom. There will always be 
people better than you -that's a cliche of nihilism, like the phrase, In a million years, who's 
going to know the difference? The proper response to that statement is not, Well, then, 
everything is meaningless. It's, Any idiot can choose a frame of time within which nothing matters. 
Talking yourself into irrelevance is not a profound critique of Being. It's a cheap trick of 
the rational mind. 

Many Good Games 

Standards of better or worse are not illusory or unnecessary. If you hadn't decided that 
what you are doing right now was better than the alternatives, you wouldn't be doing it. 
The idea of a value-free choice is a contradiction in terms. Value judgments are a 
precondition for action. Furthermore, every activity, once chosen, comes with its own 
internal standards of accomplishment. If something can be done at all, it can be done 
better or worse. To do anything at all is therefore to play a game with a defined and 
valued end, which can always be reached more or less efficiently and elegantly. Every 
game comes with its chance of success or failure. Differentials in quality are omnipresent. 
Furthermore, if there was no better and worse, nothing would be worth doing. There 
would be no value and, therefore, no meaning. Why make an effort if it doesn't improve 
anything? Meaning itself requires the difference between better and worse. How, then, 
can the voice of critical self-consciousness be stilled? Where are the flaws in the 
apparently impeccable logic of its message? 

We might start by considering the all-too-black-and-white words themselves: "success" 
or "failure." You are either a success, a comprehensive, singular, over-all good thing, or 
its opposite, a failure, a comprehensive, singular, irredeemably bad thing. The words 
imply no alternative and no middle ground. However, in a world as complex as ours, such 
generalizations (really, such failure to differentiate) are a sign of naive, unsophisticated or 
even malevolent analysis. There are vital degrees and gradations of value obliterated by 
this binary system, and the consequences are not good. 

To begin with, there is not just one game at which to succeed or fail. There are many 
games and, more specifically, many good games-games that match your talents, involve 
you productively with other people, and sustain and even improve themselves across 
time. Lawyer is a good game. So is plumber, physician, carpenter, or schoolteacher. The 
world allows for many ways of Being. If you don't succeed at one, you can try another. 
You can pick something better matched to your unique mix of strengths, weaknesses and 
situation. Furthermore, if changing games does not work, you can invent a new one. I 
recently watched a talent show featuring a mime who taped his mouth shut and did 
something ridiculous with oven mitts. That was unexpected. That was original. It seemed 
to be working for him. 

It's also unlikely that you're playing only one game. You have a career and friends and 
family members and personal projects and artistic endeavors and athletic pursuits. You 
might consider judging your success across all the games you play. Imagine that you are 
very good at some, middling at others, and terrible at the remainder. Perhaps that's how 
it should be. You might object: I should be winning at everything! But winning at 
everything might only mean that you're not doing anything new or difficult. You might be 
winning but you're not growing, and growing might be the most important form of 


75 



winning. Should victory in the present always take precedence over trajectory across 
time? 

Finally, you might come to realize that the specifics of the many games you are playing 
are so unique to you, so individual, that comparison to others is simply inappropriate. 
Perhaps you are overvaluing what you don't have and undervaluing what you do. There's 
some real utility in gratitude. It's also good protection against the dangers of victimhood 
and resentment. Your colleague outperforms you at work. His wife, however, is having an 
affair, while your marriage is stable and happy. Who has it better? The celebrity you 
admire is a chronic drunk driver and bigot. Is his life truly preferable to yours? 

When the internal critic puts you down using such comparisons, here's how it operates: 
First, it selects a single, arbitrary domain of comparison (fame, maybe, or power). Then it 
acts as if that domain is the only one that is relevant. Then it contrasts you unfavourably 
with someone truly stellar, within that domain. It can take that final step even further, 
using the unbridgeable gap between you and its target of comparison as evidence for the 
fundamental injustice of life. That way your motivation to do anything at all can be most 
effectively undermined. Those who accept such an approach to self-evaluation certainly 
can't be accused of making things too easy for themselves. But it's just as big a problem 
to make things too difficult. 

When we are very young we are neither individual nor informed. We have not had the 
time nor gained the wisdom to develop our own standards. In consequence, we must 
compare ourselves to others, because standards are necessary. Without them, there is 
nowhere to go and nothing to do. As we mature we become, by contrast, increasingly 
individual and unique. The conditions of our lives become more and more personal and 
less and less comparable with those of others. Symbolically speaking, this means we must 
leave the house ruled by our father, and confront the chaos of our individual Being. We 
must take note of our disarray, without completely abandoning that father in the process. 
We must then rediscover the values of our culture-veiled from us by our ignorance, 
hidden in the dusty treasure-trove of the past-rescue them, and integrate them into our 
own lives. This is what gives existence its full and necessary meaning. 

Who are you? You think you know, but maybe you don't. You are, for example, neither 
your own master, nor your own slave. You cannot easily tell yourself what to do and 
compel your own obedience (any more than you can easily tell your husband, wife, son or 
daughter what to do, and compel theirs). You are interested in some things and not in 
others. You can shape that interest, but there are limits. Some activities will always 
engage you, and others simply will not. 

You have a nature. You can play the tyrant to it, but you will certainly rebel. How hard 
can you force yourself to work and sustain your desire to work? How much can you 
sacrifice to your partner before generosity turns to resentment? What is it that you 
actually love? What is it that you genuinely want? Before you can articulate your own 
standards of value, you must see yourself as a stranger-and then you must get to know 
yourself. What do you find valuable or pleasurable? How much leisure, enjoyment, and 
reward do you require, so that you feel like more than a beast of burden? How must you 
treat yourself, so you won't kick over the traces and smash up your corral? You could 
force yourself through your daily grind and kick your dog in frustration when you come 
home. You could watch the precious days tick by. Or you could learn how to entice 
yourself into sustainable, productive activity. Do you ask yourself what you want? Do you 
negotiate fairly with yourself? Or are you a tyrant, with yourself as slave? 

When do you dislike your parents, your spouse, or your children, and why? What might 
be done about that? What do you need and want from your friends and your business 
partners? This is not a mere matter of what you should want. I'm not talking about what 
other people require from you, or your duties to them. I'm talking about determining the 


76 



nature of your moral obligation, to yourself. Should might enter into it, because you are 
nested within a network of social obligations. Should is your responsibility, and you 
should live up to it. But this does not mean you must take the role of lap-dog, obedient 
and harmless. That's how a dictator wants his slaves. 

Dare, instead, to be dangerous. Dare to be truthful. Dare to articulate yourself, and 
express (or at least become aware of) what would really justify your life. If you allowed 
your dark and unspoken desires for your partner, for example, to manifest themselves-if 
you were even willing to consider them-you might discover that they were not so dark, 
given the light of day. You might discover, instead, that you were just afraid and, so, 
pretending to be moral. You might find that getting what you actually desire would stop 
you from being tempted and straying. Are you so sure that your partner would be 
unhappy if more of you rose to the surface? The femme fatale and the anti-hero are 
sexually attractive for a reason.... 

How do you need to be spoken to? What do you need to take from people? What are 
you putting up with, or pretending to like, from duty or obligation? Consult your 
resentment. It's a revelatory emotion, for all its pathology. It's part of an evil triad: 
arrogance, deceit, and resentment. Nothing causes more harm than this underworld 
Trinity. But resentment always means one of two things. Either the resentful person is 
immature, in which case he or she should shut up, quit whining, and get on with it, or 
there is tyranny afoot-in which case the person subjugated has a moral obligation to 
speak up. Why? Because the consequence of remaining silent is worse. Of course, it's 
easier in the moment to stay silent and avoid conflict. But in the long term, that's deadly. 
When you have something to say, silence is a lie-and tyranny feeds on lies. When should 
you push back against oppression, despite the danger? When you start nursing secret 
fantasies of revenge; when your life is being poisoned and your imagination fills with the 
wish to devour and destroy. 

I had a client decades ago who suffered from severe obsessive-compulsive disorder. He 
had to line up his pyjamas just right before he could go to sleep at night. Then he had to 
fluff his pillow. Then he had to adjust the bedsheets. Over and over and over and over. I 
said, "Maybe that part of you, that insanely persistent part, wants something, inarticulate 
though it may be. Let it have its say. What could it be?" He said, "Control." I said, "Close 
your eyes and let it tell you what it wants. Don't let fear stop you. You don't have to act it 
out, just because you're thinking it." He said, "It wants me to take my stepfather by the 
collar, put him up against the door, and shake him like a rat." Maybe it was time to shake 
someone like a rat, although I suggested something a bit less primal. But God only knows 
what battles must be fought, forthrightly, voluntarily, on the road to peace. What do you 
do to avoid conflict, necessary though it may be? What are you inclined to lie about, 
assuming that the truth might be intolerable? What do you fake? 

The infant is dependent on his parents for almost everything he needs. The child-the 
successful child-can leave his parents, at least temporarily, and make friends. He gives 
up a little of himself to do that, but gains much in return. The successful adolescent must 
take that process to its logical conclusion. He has to leave his parents and become like 
everyone else. He has to integrate with the group so he can transcend his childhood 
dependency. Once integrated, the successful adult then must learn how to be just the 
right amount different from everyone else. 

Be cautious when you're comparing yourself to others. You're a singular being, once 
you're an adult. You have your own particular, specific problems-financial, intimate, 
psychological, and otherwise. Those are embedded in the unique broader context of your 
existence. Your career or job works for you in a personal manner, or it does not, and it 
does so in a unique interplay with the other specifics of your life. You must decide how 


77 



much of your time to spend on this, and how much on that. You must decide what to let 
go, and what to pursue. 

The Point of Our Eyes (or, Take Stock) 

Our eyes are always pointing at things we are interested in approaching, or investigating, 
or looking for, or having. We must see, but to see, we must aim, so we are always aiming. 
Our minds are built on the hunting-and-gathering platforms of our bodies. To hunt is to 
specify a target, track it, and throw at it. To gather is to specify and to grasp. We fling 
stones, and spears, and boomerangs. We toss balls through hoops, and hit pucks into 
nets, and curl carved granite rocks down the ice onto horizontal bull's-eyes. We launch 
projectiles at targets with bows, guns, rifles and rockets. We hurl insults, launch plans, 
and pitch ideas. We succeed when we score a goal or hit a target. We fail, or sin, when we 
do not (as the word sin means to miss the mark-). We cannot navigate, without 
something to aim at and, while we are in this world, we must always navigate. -- 

We are always and simultaneously at point "a" (which is less desirable than it could 
be), moving towards point "b" (which we deem better, in accordance with our explicit and 
implicit values). We always encounter the world in a state of insufficiency and seek its 
correction. We can imagine new ways that things could be set right, and improved, even if 
we have everything we thought we needed. Even when satisfied, temporarily, we remain 
curious. We live within a framework that defines the present as eternally lacking and the 
future as eternally better. If we did not see things this way, we would not act at all. We 
wouldn't even be able to see, because to see we must focus, and to focus we must pick 
one thing above all else on which to focus. 

But we can see. We can even see things that aren't there. We can envision new ways 
that things could be better. We can construct new, hypothetical worlds, where problems 
we weren't even aware of can now show themselves and be addressed. The advantages of 
this are obvious: we can change the world so that the intolerable state of the present can 
be rectified in the future. The disadvantage to all this foresight and creativity is chronic 
unease and discomfort. Because we always contrast what is with what could be, we have 
to aim at what could be. But we can aim too high. Or too low. Or too chaotically. So we 
fail and live in disappointment, even when we appear to others to be living well. How can 
we benefit from our imaginativeness, our ability to improve the future, without 
continually denigrating our current, insufficiently successful and worthless lives? 

The first step, perhaps, is to take stock. Who are you? When you buy a house and 
prepare to live in it, you hire an inspector to list all its faults-as it is, in reality, now, not 
as you wish it could be. You'll even pay him for the bad news. You need to know. You 
need to discover the home's hidden flaws. You need to know whether they are cosmetic 
imperfections or structural inadequacies. You need to know because you can't fix 
something if you don't know it's broken-and you're broken. You need an inspector. The 
internal critic-it could play that role, if you could get it on track; if you and it could 
cooperate. It could help you take stock. But you must walk through your psychological 
house with it and listen judiciously to what it says. Maybe you're a handy-man's dream, a 
real fixer-upper. How can you start your renovations without being demoralized, even 
crushed, by your internal critic's lengthy and painful report of your inadequacies? 

Here's a hint. The future is like the past. But there's a crucial difference. The past is 
fixed, but the future-it could be better. It could be better, some precise amount-the 
amount that can be achieved, perhaps, in a day, with some minimal engagement. The 
present is eternally flawed. But where you start might not be as important as the direction 
you are heading. Perhaps happiness is always to be found in the journey uphill, and not in the 


78 


fleeting sense of satisfaction awaiting at the next peak. Much of happiness is hope, no matter 
how deep the underworld in which that hope was conceived. 

Called upon properly, the internal critic will suggest something to set in order, which 
you could set in order, which you would set in order-voluntarily, without resentment, 
even with pleasure. Ask yourself: is there one thing that exists in disarray in your life or 
your situation that you could, and would, set straight? Could you, and would you, fix that 
one thing that announces itself humbly in need of repair? Could you do it now? Imagine 
that you are someone with whom you must negotiate. Imagine further that you are lazy, 
touchy, resentful and hard to get along with. With that attitude, it's not going to be easy 
to get you moving. You might have to use a little charm and playfulness. "Excuse me," 
you might say to yourself, without irony or sarcasm. "I'm trying to reduce some of the 
unnecessary suffering around here. I could use some help." Keep the derision at bay. "I'm 
wondering if there is anything that you would be willing to do? I'd be very grateful for 
your service." Ask honestly and with humility. That's no simple matter. 

You might have to negotiate further, depending on your state of mind. Maybe you don't 
trust yourself. You think that you'll ask yourself for one thing and, having delivered, 
immediately demand more. And you'll be punitive and hurtful about it. And you'll 
denigrate what was already offered. Who wants to work for a tyrant like that? Not you. 
That's why you don't do what you want yourself to do. You're a bad employee-but a 
worse boss. Maybe you need to say to yourself, "OK. I know we haven't gotten along very 
well in the past. I'm sorry about that. I'm trying to improve. I'll probably make some 
more mistakes along the way, but I'll try to listen if you object. I'll try to learn. I noticed, 
just now, today, that you weren't really jumping at the opportunity to help when I asked. 
Is there something I could offer in return for your cooperation? Maybe if you did the 
dishes, we could go for coffee. You like espresso. How about an espresso-maybe a 
double shot? Or is there something else you want?" Then you could listen. Maybe you'll 
hear a voice inside (maybe it's even the voice of a long-lost child). Maybe it will reply, 
"Really? You really want to do something nice for me? You'll really do it? It's not a 
trick?" 

This is where you must be careful. 

That little voice-that's the voice of someone once burnt and twice shy. So, you could 
say, very carefully, "Really. I might not do it very well, and I might not be great company, 
but I will do something nice for you. I promise." A little careful kindness goes a long way, 
and judicious reward is a powerful motivator. Then you could take that small bit of 
yourself by the hand and do the damn dishes. And then you better not go clean the 
bathroom and forget about the coffee or the movie or the beer or it will be even harder to 
call those forgotten parts of yourself forth from the nooks and crannies of the underworld. 

You might ask yourself, "What could I say to someone else-my friend, my brother, my 
boss, my assistant-that would set things a bit more right between us tomorrow? What 
bit of chaos might I eradicate at home, on my desk, in my kitchen, tonight, so that the 
stage could be set for a better play? What snakes might I banish from my closet-and my 
mind?" Five hundred small decisions, five hundred tiny actions, compose your day, today, 
and every day. Could you aim one or two of these at a better result? Better, in your own 
private opinion, by your own individual standards? Could you compare your specific 
personal tomorrow with your specific personal yesterday? Could you use your own 
judgment, and ask yourself what that better tomorrow might be? 

Aim small. You don't want to shoulder too much to begin with, given your limited 
talents, tendency to deceive, burden of resentment, and ability to shirk responsibility. 
Thus, you set the following goal: by the end of the day, I want things in my life to be a 
tiny bit better than they were this morning. Then you ask yourself, "What could I do, that 
I would do, that would accomplish that, and what small thing would I like as a reward?" 


79 



Then you do what you have decided to do, even if you do it badly. Then you give yourself 
that damn coffee, in triumph. Maybe you feel a bit stupid about it, but you do it anyway. 
And you do the same thing tomorrow, and the next day, and the next. And, with each 
day, your baseline of comparison gets a little higher, and that's magic. That's compound 
interest. Do that for three years, and your life will be entirely different. Now you're 
aiming for something higher. Now you're wishing on a star. Now the beam is 
disappearing from your eye, and you're learning to see. And what you aim at determines 
what you see. That's worth repeating. What you aim at determines what you see. 

What You Want and What You See 

The dependency of sight on aim (and, therefore, on value-because you aim at what you 
value) was demonstrated unforgettably by the cognitive psychologist Daniel Simons more 
than fifteen years ago. Simons was investigating something called "sustained 
inattentional blindness." He would sit his research subjects in front of a video monitor 
and show them, for example, a field of wheat. Then he would transform the photo slowly, 
secretly, while they watched. He would slowly fade in a road cutting through the wheat. 
He didn't insert some little easy-to-miss footpath, either. It was a major trail, occupying a 
good third of the image. Remarkably, the observers would frequently fail to take notice. 

The demonstration that made Dr. Simons famous was of the same kind, but more 
dramatic-even unbelievable. First, he produced a video of two teams of three people. 
One team was wearing white shirts, the other, black. (The two teams were not off in the 
distance, either, or in any way difficult to see. The six of them filled much of the video 
screen, and their facial features were close enough to see clearly.) Each team had its own 
ball, which they bounced or threw to their other team members, as they moved and 
feinted in the small space in front of the elevators where the game was filmed. Once Dan 
had his video, he showed it to his study participants. He asked each of them to count the 
number of times the white shirts threw the ball back and forth to one another. After a few 
minutes, his subjects were asked to report the number of passes. Most answered "5." 
That was the correct answer. Most felt pretty good about that. Ha! They passed the test! 
But then Dr. Simons asked, "Did you see the gorilla?" 

Was this a joke? What gorilla? 

So, he said, "Watch the video again. But this time, don't count." Sure enough, a minute 
or so in, a man dressed in a gorilla suit waltzes right into the middle of the game for a few 
long seconds, stops, and then beats his chest in the manner of stereotyped gorillas 
everywhere. Right in the middle of the screen. Large as life. Painfully and irrefutably 
evident. But one out of every two of his research subjects missed it, the first time they 
saw the video. It gets worse. Dr. Simons did another study. This time, he showed his 
subjects a video of someone being served at a counter. The server dips behind the counter 
to retrieve something, and pops back up. So what? Most of his participants don't detect 
anything amiss. But it was a different person who stood up in the original server's place! 
"No way," you think. "I'd notice." But it's "yes way." There's a high probability you 
wouldn't detect the change, even if the gender or race of the person is switched at the 
same time. You're blind too. 

This is partly because vision is expensive-psychophysiologically expensive; 
neurologically expensive. Very little of your retina is high-resolution fovea-the very 
central, high-resolution part of the eye, used to do such things as identify faces. Each of 
the scarce foveal cells needs 10,000 cells in the visual cortex merely to manage the first 
part of the multi-stage processing of seeing. Then each of those 10,000 requires 10,000 
more just to get to stage two. If all your retina was fovea you would require the skull of a 
B-movie alien to house your brain. In consequence, we triage, when we see. Most of our 


80 


vision is peripheral, and low resolution. We save the fovea for things of importance. We 
point our high-resolution capacities at the few specific things we are aiming at. And we 
let everything else-which is almost everything-fade, unnoticed, into the background. 

If something you're not attending to pops its ugly head up in a manner that directly 
interferes with your narrowly focused current activity, you will see it. Otherwise, it's just 
not there. The ball on which Simons's research subjects were focused was never obscured 
by the gorilla or by any of the six players. Because of that-because the gorilla did not 
interfere with the ongoing, narrowly defined task-it was indistinguishable from 
everything else the participants didn't see, when they were looking at that ball. The big 
ape could be safely ignored. That's how you deal with the overwhelming complexity of 
the world: you ignore it, while you concentrate minutely on your private concerns. You 
see things that facilitate your movement forward, toward your desired goals. You detect 
obstacles, when they pop up in your path. You're blind to everything else (and there's a 
lot of everything else-so you're very blind). And it has to be that way, because there is 
much more of the world than there is of you. You must shepherd your limited resources 
carefully. Seeing is very difficult, so you must choose what to see, and let the rest go. 

There's a profound idea in the ancient Vedic texts (the oldest scriptures of Hinduism, 
and part of the bedrock of Indian culture): the world, as perceived, is maya -appearance or 
illusion. This means, in part, that people are blinded by their desires (as well as merely 
incapable of seeing things as they truly are). This is true, in a sense that transcends the 
metaphorical. Your eyes are tools. They are there to help you get what you want. The 
price you pay for that utility, that specific, focused direction, is blindness to everything 
else. This doesn't matter so much when things are going well, and we are getting what we 
want (although it can be a problem, even then, because getting what we currently want 
can make blind us to higher callings). But all that ignored world presents a truly terrible 
problem when we're in crisis, and nothing whatsoever is turning out the way we want it 
to. Then, there can be far too much to deal with. Happily, however, that problem contains 
within it the seeds of its own solution. Since you've ignored so much, there is plenty of 
possibility left where you have not yet looked. 

Imagine that you're unhappy. You're not getting what you need. Perversely, this may be 
because of what you want. You are blind, because of what you desire. Perhaps what you 
really need is right in front of your eyes, but you cannot see it because of what you are 
currently aiming for. And that brings us to something else: the price that must be paid 
before you, or anyone, can get what they want (or, better yet, what they need). Think 
about it this way. You look at the world in your particular, idiosyncratic manner. You use 
a set of tools to screen most things out and let some things in. You have spent a lot of 
time building those tools. They've become habitual. They're not mere abstract thoughts. 
They're built right into you. They orient you in the world. They're your deepest and often 
implicit and unconscious values. They've become part of your biological structure. 
They're alive. And they don't want to disappear, or transform, or die. But sometimes their 
time has come, and new things need to be born. For this reason (although not only for 
this reason) it is necessary to let things go during the journey uphill. If things are not 
going well for you-well, that might be because, as the most cynical of aphorisms has it, 
life sucks, and then you die. Before your crisis impels you to that hideous conclusion, 
however, you might consider the following: life doesn't have the problem. You do. At least 
that realization leaves you with some options. If your life is not going well, perhaps it is 
your current knowledge that is insufficient, not life itself. Perhaps your value structure 
needs some serious retooling. Perhaps what you want is blinding you to what else could 
be. Perhaps you are holding on to your desires, in the present, so tightly that you cannot 
see anything else-even what you truly need. 


81 



Imagine that you are thinking, enviously, "I should have my boss's job." If your boss 
sticks to his post, stubbornly and competently, thoughts like that will lead you into in a 
state of irritation, unhappiness and disgust. You might realize this. You think, "I am 
unhappy. However, I could be cured of this unhappiness if I could just fulfill my 
ambition." But then you might think further. "Wait," you think. "Maybe I'm not unhappy 
because I don't have my boss's job. Maybe I'm unhappy because I can't stop wanting that 
job." That doesn't mean you can just simply and magically tell yourself to stop wanting 
that job, and then listen and transform. You won't-can't, in fact-just change yourself 
that easily. You have to dig deeper. You must change what you are after more profoundly. 

So, you might think, "I don't know what to do about this stupid suffering. I can't just 
abandon my ambitions. That would leave me nowhere to go. But my longing for a job that 
I can't have isn't working." You might decide to take a different tack. You might ask, 
instead, for the revelation of a different plan: one that would fulfill your desires and 
gratify your ambitions in a real sense, but that would remove from your life the bitterness 
and resentment with which you are currently affected. You might think, "I will make a 
different plan. I will try to want whatever it is that would make my life better -whatever that 
might be-and I will start working on it now. If that turns out to mean something other 
than chasing my boss's job, I will accept that and I will move forward." 

Now you're on a whole different kind of trajectory. Before, what was right, desirable, 
and worthy of pursuit was something narrow and concrete. But you became stuck there, 
tightly jammed and unhappy. So you let go. You make the necessary sacrifice, and allow a 
whole new world of possibility, hidden from you because of your previous ambition, to 
reveal itself. And there's a lot there. What would your life look like, if it were better? What 
would Life Itself look like? What does "better" even mean? You don't know. And it 
doesn't matter that you don't know, exactly, right away, because you will start to slowly 
see what is "better," once you have truly decided to want it. You will start to perceive 
what remained hidden from you by your presuppositions and preconceptions-by the 
previous mechanisms of your vision. You will begin to learn. 

This will only work, however, if you genuinely want your life to improve. You can't fool 
your implicit perceptual structures. Not even a bit. They aim where you point them. To 
retool, to take stock, to aim somewhere better, you have to think it through, bottom to 
top. You have to scour your psyche. You have to clean the damned thing up. And you 
must be cautious, because making your life better means adopting a lot of responsibility, 
and that takes more effort and care than living stupidly in pain and remaining arrogant, 
deceitful and resentful. 

What if it was the case that the world revealed whatever goodness it contains in precise 
proportion to your desire for the best? What if the more your conception of the best has 
been elevated, expanded and rendered sophisticated the more possibility and benefit you 
could perceive? This doesn't mean that you can have what you want merely by wishing it, 
or that everything is interpretation, or that there is no reality. The world is still there, 
with its structures and limits. As you move along with it, it cooperates or objects. But you 
can dance with it, if your aim is to dance-and maybe you can even lead, if you have 
enough skill and enough grace. This is not theology. It's not mysticism. It's empirical 
knowledge. There is nothing magical here-or nothing more than the already-present 
magic of consciousness. We only see what we aim at. The rest of the world (and that's 
most of it) is hidden. If we start aiming at something different-something like "I want 
my life to be better"-our minds will start presenting us with new information, derived 
from the previously hidden world, to aid us in that pursuit. Then we can put that 
information to use and move, and act, and observe, and improve. And, after doing so, 
after improving, we might pursue something different, or higher-something like, "I want 


82 



whatever might be better than just my life being better." And then we enter a more 
elevated and more complete reality. 

In that place, what might we focus on? What might we see? 

Think about it like this. Start from the observation that we indeed desire things-even 
that we need them. That's human nature. We share the experience of hunger, loneliness, 
thirst, sexual desire, aggression, fear and pain. Such things are elements of Being- 
primordial, axiomatic elements of Being. But we must sort and organize these primordial 
desires, because the world is a complex and obstinately real place. We can't just get the 
one particular thing we especially just want now, along with everything else we usually 
want, because our desires can produce conflict with our other desires, as well as with 
other people, and with the world. Thus, we must become conscious of our desires, and 
articulate them, and prioritize them, and arrange them into hierarchies. That makes them 
sophisticated. That makes them work with each other, and with the desires of other 
people, and with the world. It is in that manner that our desires elevate themselves. It is 
in that manner that they organize themselves into values and become moral. Our values, 
our morality-they are indicators of our sophistication. 

The philosophical study of morality-of right and wrong-is ethics. Such study can 
render us more sophisticated in our choices. Even older and deeper than ethics, however, 
is religion. Religion concerns itself not with (mere) right and wrong but with good and 
evil themselves-with the archetypes of right and wrong. Religion concerns itself with 
domain of value, ultimate value. That is not the scientific domain. It's not the territory of 
empirical description. The people who wrote and edited the Bible, for example, weren't 
scientists. They couldn't have been scientists, even if they had wanted to be. The 
viewpoints, methods and practices of science hadn't been formulated when the Bible was 
written. 

Religion is instead about proper behaviour. It's about what Plato called "the Good." A 
genuine religious acolyte isn't trying to formulate accurate ideas about the objective 
nature of the world (although he may be trying to do that to). He's striving, instead, to be 
a "good person." It may be the case that to him "good" means nothing but "obedient"- 
even blindly obedient. Hence the classic liberal Western enlightenment objection to 
religious belief: obedience is not enough. But it's at least a start (and we have forgotten 
this): You cannot aim yourself at anything if you are completely undisciplined and untutored. You 
will not know what to target, and you won't fly straight, even if you somehow get your 
aim right. And then you will conclude, "There is nothing to aim for." And then you will 
be lost. 

It is therefore necessary and desirable for religions to have a dogmatic element. What 
good is a value system that does not provide a stable structure? What good is a value 
system that does not point the way to a higher order? And what good can you possibly be 
if you cannot or do not internalize that structure, or accept that order-not as a final 
destination, necessarily, but at least as a starting point? Without that, you're nothing but 
an adult two-year-old, without the charm or the potential. That is not to say (to say it 
again) that obedience is sufficient. But a person capable of obedience-let's say, instead, a 
properly disciplined person-is at least a well-forged tool. At least that (and that is not 
nothing). Of course, there must be vision, beyond discipline; beyond dogma. A tool still 
needs a purpose. It is for such reasons that Christ said, in the Gospel of Thomas, "The 
Kingdom of the Father is spread out upon the earth, but men do not see it." 

Does that mean that what we see is dependent on our religious beliefs? Yes! And what 
we don't see, as well! You might object, "But I'm an atheist." No, you're not (and if you 
want to understand this, you could read Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment, perhaps the 
greatest novel ever written, in which the main character, Raskolnikov, decides to take his 
atheism with true seriousness, commits what he has rationalized as a benevolent murder, 


83 


and pays the price). You're simply not an atheist in your actions, and it is your actions 
that most accurately reflect your deepest beliefs-those that are implicit, embedded in 
your being, underneath your conscious apprehensions and articulable attitudes and 
surface-level self-knowledge. You can only find out what you actually believe (rather than 
what you think you believe) by watching how you act. You simply don't know what you 
believe, before that. You are too complex to understand yourself. 

It takes careful observation, and education, and reflection, and communication with 
others, just to scratch the surface of your beliefs. Everything you value is a product of 
unimaginably lengthy developmental processes, personal, cultural and biological. You 
don't understand how what you want-and, therefore, what you see-is conditioned by 
the immense, abysmal, profound past. You simply don't understand how every neural 
circuit through which you peer at the world has been shaped (and painfully) by the 
ethical aims of millions of years of human ancestors and all of the life that was lived for 
the billions of years before that. 

You don't understand anything. 

You didn't even know that you were blind. 

Some of our knowledge of our beliefs has been documented. We have been watching 
ourselves act, reflecting on that watching, and telling stories distilled through that 
reflection, for tens and perhaps hundreds of thousands of years. That is all part of our 
attempts, individual and collective, to discover and articulate what it is that we believe. 
Part of the knowledge so generated is what is encapsulated in the fundamental teachings 
of our cultures, in ancient writings such as the Tao te Ching, or the aforementioned Vedic 
scriptures, or the Biblical stories. The Bible is, for better or worse, the foundational 
document of Western civilization (of Western values, Western morality, and Western 
conceptions of good and evil). It's the product of processes that remain fundamentally 
beyond our comprehension. The Bible is a library composed of many books, each written 
and edited by many people. It's a truly emergent document-a selected, sequenced and 
finally coherent story written by no one and everyone over many thousands of years. The 
Bible has been thrown up, out of the deep, by the collective human imagination, which is 
itself a product of unimaginable forces operating over unfathomable spans of time. Its 
careful, respectful study can reveal things to us about what we believe and how we do and 
should act that can be discovered in almost no other manner. 

Old Testament God and New Testament God 

The God of the Old Testament can appear harsh, judgmental, unpredictable and 
dangerous, particularly on cursory reading. The degree to which this is true has arguably 
been exaggerated by Christian commentators, intent on magnifying the distinction 
between the older and newer divisions of the Bible. There has been a price paid, however, 
for such plotting (and I mean that in both senses of the word): the tendency for modern 
people to think, when confronted with Jehovah, "I would never believe in a God like 
that." But Old Testament God doesn't much care what modern people think. He often 
didn't care what Old Testament people thought, either (although He could be bargained 
with, to a surprising degree, as is particularly evident in the Abrahamic stories). 
Nonetheless, when His people strayed from the path-when they disobeyed His 
injunctions, violated His covenants, and broke His commandments-trouble was certain 
to follow. If you did not do what Old Testament God demanded-whatever that might 
have been and however you might have tried to hide from it-you and your children and 
your children's children were in terrible, serious trouble. 

It was realists who created, or noticed, Old Testament God. When the denizens of 
those ancient societies wandered carelessly down the wrong path, they ended up enslaved 


84 



and miserable-sometimes for centuries-when they were not obliterated completely. 
Was that reasonable? Was that just? Was that fair? The authors of the Old Testament 
asked such questions with extreme caution and under very limited conditions. They 
assumed, instead, that the Creator of Being knew what he was doing, that all power was 
essentially with Him, and that His dictates should be carefully followed. They were wise. 
He was a Force of Nature. Is a hungry lion reasonable, fair or just? What kind of 
nonsensical question is that? The Old Testament Israelites and their forebears knew that 
God was not to be trifled with, and that whatever Hell the angry Deity might allow to be 
engendered if he was crossed was real. Having recently passed through a century defined 
by the bottomless horrors of Hitler, Stalin, and Mao, we might realize the same thing. 

New Testament God is often presented as a different character (although the Book of 
Revelation, with its Final Judgment, warns against any excessively naive complacency). 
He is more the kindly Geppetto, master craftsman and benevolent father. He wants 
nothing for us but the best. He is all-loving and all-forgiving. Sure, He'll send you to Hell, 
if you misbehave badly enough. Fundamentally, however, he's the God of Love. That 
seems more optimistic, more naively welcoming, but (in precise proportion to that) less 
believable. In a world such as this-this hothouse of doom-who could buy such a story? 
The all-good God, in a post-Auschwitz world? It was for such reasons that the 
philosopher Nietzsche, perhaps the most astute critic ever to confront Christianity, 
considered New Testament God the worst literary crime in Western history. In Beyond 
Good and Evil, he wrote: 

In the Jewish 'Old Testament', the book of divine justice, there are men, things and speeches on such a grand 
style that Greek and Indian literature has nothing to compare with it. One stands with fear and reverence before 
those stupendous remains of what man was formerly, and one has sad thoughts about old Asia and its little out- 
pushed peninsula Europe.... To have bound up this New Testament (a kind of ROCOCO of taste in every 
respect) along with the Old Testament into one book, as the "Bible," as "The Book in Itself' is perhaps the 
greatest audacity and "sin against the spirit" which literary Europe has on its conscience. 

Who but the most naive among us could posit that such an all-good, merciful Being ruled 
this so-terrible world? But something that seems incomprehensible to someone unseeing 
might be perfectly evident to someone who had opened his eyes. 

Let's return to the situation where your aim is being determined by something petty- 
your aforementioned envy of your boss. Because of that envy, the world you inhabit 
reveals itself as a place of bitterness, disappointment and spite. Imagine that you come to 
notice, and contemplate, and reconsider your unhappiness. Further, you determine to 
accept responsibility for it, and dare to posit that it might be something at least partly 
under your control. You crack open one eye, for a moment, and look. You ask for 
something better. You sacrifice your pettiness, repent of your envy, and open your heart. 
Instead of cursing the darkness, you let in a little light. You decide to aim for a better life 
-instead of a better office. 

But you don't stop there. You realize that it's a mistake to aim for a better life, if it 
comes at the cost of worsening someone else's. So, you get creative. You decide to play a 
more difficult game. You decide that you want a better life, in a manner that will also 
make the life of your family better. Or the life of your family, and your friends. Or the life 
of your family, and your friends, and the strangers who surround them. What about your 
enemies? Do you want to include them, too? You bloody well don't know how to manage 
that. But you've read some history. You know how enmity compounds. So, you start to 
wish even your enemies well, at least in principle, although you are by no means yet a 
master of such sentiments. 

And the direction of your sight changes. You see past the limitations that hemmed you 
in, unknowingly. New possibilities for your life emerge, and you work toward their 
realization. Your life indeed improves. And then you start to think, further: "Better? 
Perhaps that means better for me, and my family, and my friends-even for my enemies. 


85 


But that's not all it means. It means better today, in a manner that makes everything 
better tomorrow, and next week, and next year, and a decade from now, and a hundred 
years from now. And a thousand years from now. And forever." 

And then "better" means to aim at the Improvement of Being, with a capital and a 
capital "B." Thinking all of this-realizing all of this-you take a risk. You decide that you 
will start treating Old Testament God, with all His terrible and oft-arbitrary-seeming 
power, as if He could also be New Testament God (even though you understand the many 
ways in which that is absurd). In other words, you decide to act as if existence might be 
justified by its goodness-if only you behaved properly. And it is that decision, that 
declaration of existential faith, that allows you to overcome nihilism, and resentment, and 
arrogance. It is that declaration of faith that keeps hatred of Being, with all its attendant 
evils, at bay. And, as for such faith: it is not at all the will to believe things that you know 
perfectly well to be false. Faith is not the childish belief in magic. That is ignorance or 
even willful blindness. It is instead the realization that the tragic irrationalities of life 
must be counterbalanced by an equally irrational commitment to the essential goodness 
of Being. It is simultaneously the will to dare set your sights at the unachievable, and to 
sacrifice everything, including (and most importantly) your life. You realize that you have, 
literally, nothing better to do. But how can you do all this?-assuming you are foolish 
enough to try. 

You might start by not thinking -or, more accurately, but less trenchantly, by refusing to 
subjugate your faith to your current rationality, and its narrowness of view. This doesn't 
mean "make yourself stupid." It means the opposite. It means instead that you must quit 
manoeuvring and calculating and conniving and scheming and enforcing and demanding 
and avoiding and ignoring and punishing. It means you must place your old strategies 
aside. It means, instead, that you must pay attention, as you may never have paid 
attention before. 

Pay Attention 

Pay attention. Focus on your surroundings, physical and psychological. Notice something 
that bothers you, that concerns you, that will not let you be, which you could fix, that you 
would fix. You can find such somethings by asking yourself (as if you genuinely want to 
know) three questions: "What is it that is bothering me?" "Is that something I could fix?" 
and "Would I actually be willing to fix it?" If you find that the answer is "no," to any or 
all of the questions, then look elsewhere. Aim lower. Search until you find something that 
bothers you, that you could fix, that you would fix, and then fix it. That might be enough 
for the day. 

Maybe there is a stack of paper on your desk, and you have been avoiding it. You won't 
even really look at it, when you walk into your room. There are terrible things lurking 
there: tax forms, and bills and letters from people wanting things you aren't sure you can 
deliver. Notice your fear, and have some sympathy for it. Maybe there are snakes in that 
pile of paper. Maybe you'll get bitten. Maybe there are even hydras lurking there. You'll 
cut off one head, and seven more will grow. How could you possibly cope with that? 

You could ask yourself, "Is there anything at all that I might be willing to do about that 
pile of paper? Would I look, maybe, at one part of it? For twenty minutes?" Maybe the 
answer will be, "No!" But you might look for ten, or even for five (and if not that, for 
one). Start there. You will soon find that the entire pile shrinks in significance, merely 
because you have looked at part of it. And you'll find that the whole thing is made of 
parts. What if you allowed yourself a glass of wine with dinner, or curled up on the sofa 
and read, or watched a stupid movie, as a reward? What if you instructed your wife, or 
your husband, to say "good job" after you fixed whatever you fixed? Would that motivate 


86 



you? The people from whom thanks you want might not be very proficient in offering it, 
to begin with, but that shouldn't stop you. People can learn, even if they are very 
unskilled at the beginning. Ask yourself what you would require to be motivated to 
undertake the job, honestly, and listen to the answer. Don't tell yourself, "I shouldn't 
need to do that to motivate myself." What do you know about yourself? You are, on the 
one hand, the most complex thing in the entire universe, and on the other, someone who 
can't even set the clock on your microwave. Don't over-estimate your self-knowledge. 

Let the tasks for the day announce themselves for your contemplation. Maybe you can 
do this in the morning, as you sit on the edge of your bed. Maybe you can try, the night 
before, when you are preparing to sleep. Ask yourself for a voluntary contribution. If you 
ask nicely, and listen carefully, and don't try any treachery, you might be offered one. Do 
this every day, for a while. Then do it for the rest of your life. Soon you will find yourself 
in a different situation. Now you will be asking yourself, habitually, "What could I do, 
that I would do, to make Life a little better?" You are not dictating to yourself what 
"better" must be. You are not being a totalitarian, or a utopian, even to yourself, because 
you have learned from the Nazis and the Soviets and the Maoists and from your own 
experience that being a totalitarian is a bad thing. Aim high. Set your sights on the 
betterment of Being. Align yourself, in your soul, with Truth and the Highest Good. There 
is habitable order to establish and beauty to bring into existence. There is evil to 
overcome, suffering to ameliorate, and yourself to better. 

It is this, in my reading, that is the culminating ethic of the canon of the West. It is 
this, furthermore, that is communicated by those eternally confusing, glowing stanzas 
from Christ's Sermon on the Mount, the essence, in some sense, of the wisdom of the 
New Testament. This is the attempt of the Spirit of Mankind to transform the 
understanding of ethics from the initial, necessary Thou Shalt Not of the child and the 
Ten Commandments into the fully articulated, positive vision of the true individual. This 
is the expression not merely of admirable self-control and self-mastery but of the 
fundamental desire to set the world right. This is not the cessation of sin, but sin's 
opposite, good itself. The Sermon on the Mount outlines the true nature of man, and the 
proper aim of mankind: concentrate on the day, so that you can live in the present, and 
attend completely and properly to what is right in front of you-but do that only after you 
have decided to let what is within shine forth, so that it can justify Being and illuminate 
the world. Do that only after you have determined to sacrifice whatever it is that must be 
sacrificed so that you can pursue the highest good. 

Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: 

And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. 

Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall 
he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith? 

Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be 
clothed? 

(For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all 
these things. 

But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you. 

Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. 
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. (Luke 12: 22-34) 

Realization is dawning. Instead of playing the tyrant, therefore, you are paying attention. 
You are telling the truth, instead of manipulating the world. You are negotiating, instead 
of playing the martyr or the tyrant. You no longer have to be envious, because you no 
longer know that someone else truly has it better. You no longer have to be frustrated, 
because you have learned to aim low, and to be patient. You are discovering who you are, 
and what you want, and what you are willing to do. You are finding that the solutions to 
your particular problems have to be tailored to you, personally and precisely. You are less 
concerned with the actions of other people, because you have plenty to do yourself. 


87 



Attend to the day, but aim at the highest good. 

Now, your trajectory is heavenward. That makes you hopeful. Even a man on a sinking 
ship can be happy when he clambers aboard a lifeboat! And who knows where he might 
go, in the future. To journey happily may well be better than to arrive successfully.... 

Ask, and ye shall receive. Knock, and the door will open. If you ask, as if you want, and 
knock, as if you want to enter, you may be offered the chance to improve your life, a little; 
a lot; completely-and with that improvement, some progress will be made in Being 
itself. 

Compare yourself to who you were yesterday, not to who someone else is today. 


88 



m THE COMMON LAW m 

HERE THE COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND WAS ESTABLISHED 
ON THIS CONTINENT WITH THE ARRIVAL OF THE FIRST 
SETTLERS ON MAY 13.1607. THE FIRST CHARTER CRANTED 
BY JAMES I TO THE VIRCINJA COMPANY IN 1606 DECLARFD 
THAT THE INHABITANTS OF THE COLONY"...SHALL HAVE 
AND ENJOY ALL LIBERTIES. FRANCHISES AW IMMUNITIES... 
AS IF THEY HAD BEEN ABIDING AND BORNE WITHIN THIS 
OUR REALME OF ENCLANDE..." SINCE MAGNA CARTA THE 
COMMON LAW HAS BFEN THE CORNERSTONE OF INDIVIDUAL 
LIBERTIES. EVEN AS AGAINST THE CROWN. SUMMARIZED 
LATER IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS ITS PRINCIPLES HAVF 
INSPIRED THE DEVELOPMENT OF OUR SYSTEM OF FREEDOM 
UNDER LAW. WHICH IS AT ONCE OUR DEAREST 
POSSESSION AND PROUDEST ACHIEVEMENT. 








a 


90 


RULE 5 


DO NOT LET YOUR CHILDREN DO ANYTHING THAT MAKES 

YOU DISLIKE THEM 


ACTUALLY, IT'S NOT OK 

Recently, I watched a three-year-old boy trail his mother and father slowly through a 
crowded airport. He was screaming violently at five-second intervals-and, more 
important, he was doing it voluntarily. He wasn't at the end of this tether. As a parent, I 
could tell from the tone. He was irritating his parents and hundreds of other people to 
gain attention. Maybe he needed something. But that was no way to get it, and his 
parents should have let him know that. You might object that "perhaps they were worn 
out, and jet-lagged, after a long trip." But thirty seconds of carefully directed problem- 
solving would have brought the shameful episode to a halt. More thoughtful parents 
would not have let someone they truly cared for become the object of a crowd's contempt. 

I have also watched a couple, unable or unwilling to say no to their two-year-old, 
obliged to follow closely behind him everywhere he went, every moment of what was 
supposed to be an enjoyable social visit, because he misbehaved so badly when not micro- 
managed that he could not be given a second of genuine freedom without risk. The desire 
of his parents to let their child act without correction on every impulse perversely 
produced precisely the opposite effect: they deprived him instead of every opportunity to 
engage in independent action. Because they did not dare to teach him what "No" means, 
he had no conception of the reasonable limits enabling maximal toddler autonomy. It was 
a classic example of too much chaos breeding too much order (and the inevitable 
reversal). I have, similarly, seen parents rendered unable to engage in adult conversation 
at a dinner party because their children, four and five, dominated the social scene, eating 
the centres out of all the sliced bread, subjecting everyone to their juvenile tyranny, while 
mom and dad watched, embarrassed and bereft of the ability to intervene. 

When my now-adult daughter was a child, another child once hit her on the head with 
a metal toy truck. I watched that same child, one year later, viciously push his younger 
sister backwards over a fragile glass-surfaced coffee table. His mother picked him up, 
immediately afterward (but not her frightened daughter), and told him in hushed tones 
not to do such things, while she patted him comfortingly in a manner clearly indicative of 
approval. She was out to produce a little God-Emperor of the Universe. That's the 
unstated goal of many a mother, including many who consider themselves advocates for 
full gender equality. Such women will object vociferously to any command uttered by an 
adult male, but will trot off in seconds to make their progeny a peanut-butter sandwich if 
he demands it while immersed self-importantly in a video game. The future mates of such 
boys have every reason to hate their mothers-in-law. Respect for women? That's for other 
boys, other men-not for their dear sons. 

Something of the same sort may underlie, in part, the preference for male children seen 
most particularly in places such as India, Pakistan and China, where sex-selective 
abortion is widely practised. The Wikipedia entry for that practice attributes its existence 
to "cultural norms" favouring male over female children. (I cite Wikipedia because it is 
collectively written and edited and, therefore, the perfect place to find accepted wisdom.) 
But there's no evidence that such ideas are strictly cultural. There are plausible psycho- 
biological reasons for the evolution of such an attitude, and they're not pretty, from a 
modern, egalitarian perspective. If circumstances force you to put all your eggs into one 


91 



basket, so to speak, a son is a better bet, by the strict standards of evolutionary logic, 
where the proliferation of your genes is all that matters. Why? 

Well, a reproductively successful daughter might gain you eight or nine children. The 
Holocaust survivor Yitta Schwartz, a star in this regard, had three generations of direct 
descendants who matched such performance. She was the ancestor of almost two 
thousand people by the time of her death in 2010. But the sky is truly the limit with a 
reproductively successful son. Sex with multiple female partners is his ticket to 
exponential reproduction (given our species' practical limitation to single births). 
Rumour has it that the actor Warren Beatty and the athlete Wilt Chamberlain each 
bedded multiple thousands of women (something not unknown, as well, among rock 
stars). They didn't produce children in those numbers. Modern birth control limits that. 
But similar celebrity types in the past have done so. The forefather of the Qing dynasty, 
Giocangga (circa 1550), for example, is the male-line ancestor of a million and a half 
people in northeastern China. The medieval Ui Neill dynasty produced up to three 
million male descendants, localized mainly in northwestern Ireland and the US, through 
Irish emigration.- And the king of them all, Genghis Khan, conqueror of much of Asia, is 
forefather of 8 percent of the men in Central Asia-sixteen million male descendants, 34 
generations later. So, from a deep, biological perspective there are reasons why parents 
might favour sons sufficiently to eliminate female fetuses, although I am not claiming 
direct causality, nor suggesting a lack of other, more culturally-dependent reasons. 

Preferential treatment awarded a son during development might even help produce an 
attractive, well-rounded, confident man. This happened in the case of the father of 
psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud, by his own account: "A man who has been the 
indisputable favorite of his mother keeps for life the feeling of a conqueror, that 
confidence of success that often induces real success."' Fair enough. But "feeling of a 
conqueror" can all too easily become "actual conqueror." Genghis Khan's outstanding 
reproductive success certainly came at the cost of any success whatsoever for others 
(including the dead millions of Chinese, Persians, Russians and Hungarians). Spoiling a 
son might therefore work well from the standpoint of the "selfish gene" (allowing the 
favoured child's genes to replicate themselves in innumerable offspring), to use the 
evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins' famous expression. But it can make for a dark, 
painful spectacle in the here and now, and mutate into something indescribably 
dangerous. 

None of this means that all mothers favour all sons over their daughters (or that 
daughters are not sometimes favoured over sons, or that fathers don't sometimes favor 
their sons). Other factors can clearly dominate. Sometimes, for example, unconscious 
hatred (sometimes not-so-unconscious, either) overrides any concern a parent might have 
for any child, regardless of gender or personality or situation. I saw a four-year old boy 
allowed to go hungry on a regular basis. His nanny had been injured, and he was being 
cycled through the neighbours for temporary care. When his mother dropped him off at 
our house, she indicated that he wouldn't eat at all, all day. "That's OK," she said. It 
wasn't OK (in case that's not obvious). This was the same four-year-old boy who clung to 
my wife for hours in absolute desperation and total commitment, when she tenaciously, 
persistently and mercifully managed to feed him an entire lunch-time meal, rewarding 
him throughout for his cooperation, and refusing to let him fail. He started out with a 
closed mouth, sitting with all of us at the dining room table, my wife and I, our two kids, 
and two neighbourhood kids we looked after during the day. She put the spoon in front of 
him, waiting patiently, persistently, while he moved his head back and forth, refusing it 
entry, using defensive methods typical of a recalcitrant and none-too-well-attended two- 
year old. 


92 


She didn't let him fail. She patted him on the head every time he managed a mouthful, 
telling him sincerely that he was a "good boy" when he did so. She did think he was a 
good boy. He was a cute, damaged kid. Ten not-too-painful minutes later he finished his 
meal. We were all watching intently. It was a drama of life and death. 

"Look," she said, holding up his bowl. "You finished all of it." This boy, who was 
standing in the corner, voluntarily and unhappily, when I first saw him; who wouldn't 
interact with the other kids, who frowned chronically, who wouldn't respond to me when 
I tickled and prodded him, trying to get him to play-this boy broke immediately into a 
wide, radiant smile. It brought joy to everyone at the table. Twenty years later, writing it 
down today, it still brings me to tears. Afterward, he followed my wife around like a 
puppy for the rest of the day, refusing to let her out of his sight. When she sat down, he 
jumped in her lap, cuddling in, opening himself back up to the world, searching 
desperately for the love he had been continually denied. Later in the day, but far too soon, 
his mother reappeared. She came down the stairs into the room we all occupied. "Oh, 
SuperMom," she uttered, resentfully, seeing her son curled up in my wife's lap. Then she 
departed, black, murderous heart unchanged, doomed child in hand. She was a 
psychologist. The things you can see, with even a single open eye. It's no wonder that 
people want to stay blind. 

Everybody Hates Arithmetic 

My clinical clients frequently come to me to discuss their day-to-day familial problems. 
Such quotidian concerns are insidious. Their habitual and predictable occurrence makes 
them appear trivial. But that appearance of triviality is deceptive: it is the things that 
occur every single day that truly make up our lives, and time spent the same way over and 
again adds up at an alarming rate. One father recently spoke with me about the trouble he 
was having putting his son to sleep at night -a ritual that typically involved about 
three-quarters of an hour of fighting. We did the arithmetic. Forty-five minutes a day, 
seven days a week-that's three hundred minutes, or five hours, a week. Five hours for 
each of the four weeks of a month-that's twenty hours per month. Twenty hours a 
month for twelve months is two hundred and forty hours a year. That's a month and a 
half of standard forty-hour work weeks. 

My client was spending a month and a half of work weeks per year fighting ineffectually 
and miserably with his son. Needless to say, both were suffering for it. No matter how 
good your intentions, or how sweet and tolerant your temperament, you will not maintain 
good relations with someone you fight with for a month and a half of work weeks per 
year. Resentment will inevitably build. Even if it doesn't, all that wasted, unpleasant time 
could clearly be spent in more productive and useful and less stressful and more enjoyable 
activity. How are such situations to be understood? Where does the fault lie, in child or in 
parent? In nature or society? And what, if anything, is to be done? 

Some localize all such problems in the adult, whether in the parent or broader society. 
"There are no bad children," such people think, "only bad parents." When the idealized 
image of an unsullied child is brought to mind, this notion appears fully justified. The 
beauty, openness, joy, trust and capacity for love characterizing children makes it easy to 
attribute full culpability to the adults on the scene. But such an attitude is dangerously 
and naively romantic. It's too one-sided, in the case of parents granted a particularly 
difficult son or daughter. It's also not for the best that all human corruption is uncritically 
laid at society's feet. That conclusion merely displaces the problem, back in time. It 
explains nothing, and solves no problems. If society is corrupt, but not the individuals 
within it, then where did the corruption originate? How is it propagated? It's a one-sided, 
deeply ideological theory. 


93 


Even more problematic is the insistence logically stemming from this presumption of 
social corruption that all individual problems, no matter how rare, must be solved by 
cultural restructuring, no matter how radical. Our society faces the increasing call to 
deconstruct its stabilizing traditions to include smaller and smaller numbers of people 
who do not or will not fit into the categories upon which even our perceptions are based. 
This is not a good thing. Each person's private trouble cannot be solved by a social 
revolution, because revolutions are destabilizing and dangerous. We have learned to live 
together and organize our complex societies slowly and incrementally, over vast stretches 
of time, and we do not understand with sufficient exactitude why what we are doing 
works. Thus, altering our ways of social being carelessly in the name of some ideological 
shibboleth (diversity springs to mind) is likely to produce far more trouble than good, 
given the suffering that even small revolutions generally produce. 

Was it really a good thing, for example, to so dramatically liberalize the divorce laws in 
the 1960s? It's not clear to me that the children whose lives were destabilized by the 
hypothetical freedom this attempt at liberation introduced would say so. Horror and 
terror lurk behind the walls provided so wisely by our ancestors. We tear them down at 
our peril. We skate, unconsciously, on thin ice, with deep, cold waters below, where 
unimaginable monsters lurk. 

I see today's parents as terrified by their children, not least because they have been 
deemed the proximal agents of this hypothetical social tyranny, and simultaneously 
denied credit for their role as benevolent and necessary agents of discipline, order and 
conventionality. They dwell uncomfortably and self-consciously in the shadow of the all- 
too-powerful shadow of the adolescent ethos of the 1960s, a decade whose excesses led to 
a general denigration of adulthood, an unthinking disbelief in the existence of competent 
power, and the inability to distinguish between the chaos of immaturity and responsible 
freedom. This has increased parental sensitivity to the short-term emotional suffering of 
their children, while heightening their fear of damaging their children to a painful and 
counterproductive degree. Better this than the reverse, you might argue-but there are 
catastrophes lurking at the extremes of every moral continuum. 

The Ignoble Savage 

It has been said that every individual is the conscious or unconscious follower of some 
influential philosopher. The belief that children have an intrinsically unsullied spirit, 
damaged only by culture and society, is derived in no small part from the eighteenth- 
century Genevan French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Rousseau was a fervent 
believer in the corrupting influence of human society and private ownership alike. He 
claimed that nothing was so gentle and wonderful as man in his pre-civilized state. At 
precisely the same time, noting his inability as a father, he abandoned five of his children 
to the tender and fatal mercies of the orphanages of the time. 

The noble savage Rousseau described, however, was an ideal-an abstraction, 
archetypal and religious-and not the flesh-and-blood reality he supposed. The 
mythologically perfect Divine Child permanently inhabits our imagination. He's the 
potential of youth, the newborn hero, the wronged innocent, and the long-lost son of the 
rightful king. He's the intimations of immortality that accompany our earliest 
experiences. He's Adam, the perfect man, walking without sin with God in the Garden 
before the Fall. But human beings are evil, as well as good, and the darkness that dwells 
forever in our souls is also there in no small part in our younger selves. In general, people 
improve with age, rather than worsening, becoming kinder, more conscientious, and more 
emotionally stable as they mature. Bullying at the sheer and often terrible intensity of 


94 


the schoolyard rarely manifests itself in grown-up society. William Golding's dark and 
anarchistic Lord of the Flies is a classic for a reason. 

Furthermore, there is plenty of direct evidence that the horrors of human behaviour 
cannot be so easily attributed to history and society. This was discovered most painfully, 
perhaps, by the primatologist Jane Goodall, beginning in 1974, when she learned that her 
beloved chimpanzees were capable of and willing to murder each other (to use the 
terminology appropriate to humans). Because of its shocking nature and great 
anthropological significance, she kept her observations secret for years, fearing that her 
contact with the animals had led them to manifest unnatural behaviour. Even after she 
published her account, many refused to believe it. It soon became obvious, however, that 
what she observed was by no means rare. 

Bluntly put: chimpanzees conduct inter-tribal warfare. Furthermore, they do it with 
almost unimaginable brutality. The typical full-grown chimp is more than twice as strong 
as a comparable human being, despite their smaller size. Goodall reported with some 
terror the proclivity of the chimps she studied to snap strong steel cables and levers. 
Chimps can literally tear each other to pieces-and they do. Human societies and their 
complex technologies cannot be blamed for that. "Often when I woke in the night," she 
wrote, "horrific pictures sprang unbidden to my mind-Satan [a long-observed chimp] 
cupping his hand below Sniffs chin to drink the blood that welled from a great wound in 
his face ... Jomeo tearing a strip of skin from De's thigh; Figan, charging and hitting, 
again and again, the stricken, quivering body of Goliath, one of his childhood heroes."- 
Small gangs of adolescent chimps, mostly male, roam the borders of their territory. If they 
encounter foreigners (even chimps they once knew, who had broken away from the now- 
too-large group) and, if they outnumber them, the gang will mob and destroy them, 
without mercy. Chimps don't have much of a super-ego, and it is prudent to remember 
that the human capacity for self-control may also be overestimated. Careful perusal of 
book as shocking and horrific as Iris Chang's The Rape of Nanking, 1 which describes the 
brutal decimation of that Chinese city by the invading Japanese, will disenchant even a 
committed romantic. And the less said about Unit 731, a covert Japanese biological 
warfare research unit established at that time, the better. Read about it at your peril. You 
have been warned. 

Hunter-gatherers, too, are much more murderous than their urban, industrialized 
counterparts, despite their communal lives and localized cultures. The yearly rate of 
homicide in the modern UK is about 1 per 100,000. -- It's four to five times higher in the 
US, and about ninety times higher in Honduras, which has the highest rate recorded of 
any modern nation. But the evidence strongly suggests that human beings have become 
more peaceful, rather than less so, as time has progressed and societies became larger and 
more organized. The !Kung bushmen of Africa, romanticized in the 1950s by Elizabeth 
Marshall Thomas as "the harmless people,"; had a yearly murder rate of 40 per 100,000, 
which declined by more than 30% once they became subject to state authority. This is a 
very instructive example of complex social structures serving to reduce, not exacerbate, 
the violent tendencies of human beings. Yearly rates of 300 per 100,000 have been 
reported for the Yanomami of Brazil, famed for their aggression-but the stats don't max 
out there. The denizens of Papua, New Guinea, kill each other at yearly rates ranging 
from 140 to 1000 per 100,000. However, the record appears to be held by the Kato, an 
indigeneous people of California, 1450 of whom per 100,000 met a violent death circa 
1840.- 

Because children, like other human beings, are not only good, they cannot simply be 
left to their own devices, untouched by society, and bloom into perfection. Even dogs 
must be socialized if they are to become acceptable members of the pack-and children 


95 


are much more complex than dogs. This means that they are much more likely to go 
complexly astray if they are not trained, disciplined and properly encouraged. This means 
that it is not just wrong to attribute all the violent tendencies of human beings to the 
pathologies of social structure. It's wrong enough to be virtually backward. The vital 
process of socialization prevents much harm and fosters much good. Children must be 
shaped and informed, or they cannot thrive. This fact is reflected starkly in their behavior: 
kids are utterly desperate for attention from both peers and adults because such attention, 
which renders them effective and sophisticated communal players, is vitally necessary. 

Children can be damaged as much or more by a lack of incisive attention as they are by 
abuse, mental or physical. This is damage by omission, rather than commission, but it is 
no less severe and long-lasting. Children are damaged when their "mercifully" inattentive 
parents fail to make them sharp and observant and awake and leave them, instead, in an 
unconscious and undifferentiated state. Children are damaged when those charged with 
their care, afraid of any conflict or upset, no longer dare to correct them, and leave them 
without guidance. I can recognize such children on the street. They are doughy and 
unfocused and vague. They are leaden and dull instead of golden and bright. They are 
uncarved blocks, trapped in a perpetual state of waiting-to-be. 

Such children are chronically ignored by their peers. This is because they are not fun to 
play with. Adults tend to manifest the same attitude (although they will deny it 
desperately when pressed). When I worked in daycare centres, early in my career, the 
comparatively neglected children would come to me desperately, in their fumbling, half- 
formed manner, with no sense of proper distance and no attentive playfulness. They 
would flop, nearby-or directly on my lap, no matter what I was doing-driven inexorably 
by the powerful desire for adult attention, the necessary catalyst for further development. 
It was very difficult not to react with annoyance, even disgust, to such children and their 
too-prolonged infantilism-difficult not to literally push them aside-even though I felt 
very badly for them, and understood their predicament well. I believe that response, harsh 
and terrible though it may be, was an almost universally-experienced internal warning 
signal indicating the comparative danger of establishing a relationship with a poorly 
socialized child: the likelihood of immediate and inappropriate dependence (which should 
have been the responsibility of the parent) and the tremendous demand of time and 
resources that accepting such dependence would necessitate. Confronted with such a 
situation, potentially friendly peers and interested adults are much more likely to turn 
their attention to interacting with other children whose cost/benefit ratio, to speak 
bluntly, would be much lower. 

Parent or Friend 

The neglect and mistreatment that is part and parcel of poorly structured or even entirely 
absent disciplinary approaches can be deliberate-motivated by explicit, conscious (if 
misguided) parental motives. But more often than not, modern parents are simply 
paralyzed by the fear that they will no longer be liked or even loved by their children if 
they chastise them for any reason. They want their children's friendship above all, and are 
willing to sacrifice respect to get it. This is not good. A child will have many friends, but 
only two parents-if that-and parents are more, not less, than friends. Friends have very 
limited authority to correct. Every parent therefore needs to learn to tolerate the 
momentary anger or even hatred directed towards them by their children, after necessary 
corrective action has been taken, as the capacity of children to perceive or care about long- 
term consequences is very limited. Parents are the arbiters of society. They teach children 
how to behave so that other people will be able to interact meaningfully and productively 
with them. 


96 



It is an act of responsibility to discipline a child. It is not anger at misbehavior. It is not 
revenge for a misdeed. It is instead a careful combination of mercy and long-term 
judgment. Proper discipline requires effort-indeed, is virtually synonymous with effort. 
It is difficult to pay careful attention to children. It is difficult to figure out what is wrong 
and what is right and why. It is difficult to formulate just and compassionate strategies of 
discipline, and to negotiate their application with others deeply involved in a child's care. 
Because of this combination of responsibility and difficulty, any suggestion that all 
constraints placed on children are damaging can be perversely welcome. Such a notion, 
once accepted, allows adults who should know better to abandon their duty to serve as 
agents of enculturation and pretend that doing so is good for children. It's a deep and 
pernicious act of self-deception. It's lazy, cruel and inexcusable. And our proclivity to 
rationalize does not end there. 

We assume that rules will irremediably inhibit what would otherwise be the boundless 
and intrinsic creativity of our children, even though the scientific literature clearly 
indicates, first, that creativity beyond the trivial is shockingly rare and, second, that 
strict limitations facilitate rather than inhibit creative achievement. Belief in the purely 
destructive element of rules and structure is frequently conjoined with the idea that 
children will make good choices about when to sleep and what to eat, if their perfect 
natures are merely allowed to manifest themselves. These are equally ungrounded 
assumptions. Children are perfectly capable of attempting to subsist on hot dogs, chicken 
fingers and Froot Loops if doing so will attract attention, provide power, or shield them 
from trying anything new. Instead of going to bed wisely and peacefully, children will 
fight night-time unconsciousness until they are staggered by fatigue. They are also 
perfectly willing to provoke adults, while exploring the complex contours of the social 
environment, just like juvenile chimps harassing the adults in their troupes. Observing 
the consequences of teasing and taunting enables chimp and child alike to discover the 
limits of what might otherwise be a too-unstructured and terrifying freedom. Such limits, 
when discovered, provide security, even if their detection causes momentary 
disappointment or frustration. 

I remember taking my daughter to the playground once when she was about two. She 
was playing on the monkey bars, hanging in mid-air. A particularly provocative little 
monster of about the same age was standing above her on the same bar she was gripping. 
I watched him move towards her. Our eyes locked. He slowly and deliberately stepped on 
her hands, with increasing force, over and over, as he stared me down. He knew exactly 
what he was doing. Up yours, Daddy-O-that was his philosophy. He had already 
concluded that adults were contemptible, and that he could safely defy them. (Too bad, 
then, that he was destined to become one.) That was the hopeless future his parents had 
saddled him with. To his great and salutary shock, I picked him bodily off the playground 
structure, and threw him thirty feet down the field. 

No, I didn't. I just took my daughter somewhere else. But it would have been better for 
him if I had. 

Imagine a toddler repeatedly striking his mother in the face. Why would he do such a 
thing? It's a stupid question. It's unacceptably naive. The answer is obvious. To dominate 
his mother. To see if he can get away with it. Violence, after all, is no mystery. It's peace 
that's the mystery. Violence is the default. It's easy. It's peace that is difficult: learned, 
inculcated, earned. (People often get basic psychological questions backwards. Why do 
people take drugs? Not a mystery. It's why they don't take them all the time that's the 
mystery. Why do people suffer from anxiety? That's not a mystery. How is that people 
can ever be calm? There's the mystery. We're breakable and mortal. A million things can 
go wrong, in a million ways. We should be terrified out of our skulls at every second. But 
we're not. The same can be said for depression, laziness and criminality.) 


97 


If I can hurt and overpower you, then I can do exactly what I want, when I want, even 
when you're around. I can torment you, to appease my curiosity. I can take the attention 
away from you, and dominate you. I can steal your toy. Children hit first because 
aggression is innate, although more dominant in some individuals and less in others, and, 
second, because aggression facilitates desire. It's foolish to assume that such behaviour 
must be learned. A snake does not have to be taught to strike. It's in the nature of the 
beast. Two-year-olds, statistically speaking, are the most violent of people. They kick, 
hit and bite, and they steal the property of others. They do so to explore, to express 
outrage and frustration, and to gratify their impulsive desires. More importantly, for our 
purposes, they do so to discover the true limits of permissible behaviour. How else are 
they ever going to puzzle out what is acceptable? Infants are like blind people, searching 
for a wall. They have to push forward, and test, to see where the actual boundaries lie 
(and those are too-seldom where they are said to be). 

Consistent correction of such action indicates the limits of acceptable aggression to the 
child. Its absence merely heightens curiosity-so the child will hit and bite and kick, if he 
is aggressive and dominant, until something indicates a limit. How hard can I hit 
Mommy? Until she objects. Given that, correction is better sooner than later (if the 
desired end result of the parent is not to be hit). Correction also helps the child learn that 
hitting others is a sub-optimal social strategy. Without that correction, no child is going 
to undergo the effortful process of organizing and regulating their impulses, so that those 
impulses can coexist, without conflict, within the psyche of the child, and in the broader 
social world. It is no simple matter to organize a mind. 

My son was particularly ornery when he was a toddler. When my daughter was little, I 
could paralyze her into immobility with an evil glance. Such an intervention had no effect 
at all on my son. He had my wife (who is no pushover) stymied at the dinner table by the 
time he was nine months of age. He fought her for control over the spoon. "Good!" we 
thought. We didn't want to feed him one more minute than necessary anyway. But the 
little blighter would only eat three or four mouthfuls. Then he would play. He would stir 
his food around in his bowl. He would drop bits of it over the high chair table top, and 
watch as it fell on the floor below. No problem. He was exploring. But then he wasn't 
eating enough. Then, because he wasn't eating enough, he wasn't sleeping enough. Then 
his midnight crying was waking his parents. Then they were getting grumpy and out of 
sorts. He was frustrating his mother, and she was taking it out on me. The trajectory 
wasn't good. 

After a few days of this degeneration, I decided to take the spoon back. I prepared for 
war. I set aside sufficient time. A patient adult can defeat a two-year-old, hard as that is to 
believe. As the saying goes: "Old age and treachery can always overcome youth and skill." 
This is partly because time lasts forever, when you're two. Half an hour for me was a 
week for my son. I assured myself of victory. He was stubborn and horrible. But I could be 
worse. We sat down, face to face, bowl in front of him. It was High Noon. He knew it, and 
I knew it. He picked up the spoon. I took it from him, and spooned up a delicious 
mouthful of mush. I moved it deliberately towards his mouth. He eyed me in precisely the 
same manner as the playground foot monster. He curled his lips downward into a tight 
frown, rejecting all entry. I chased his mouth around with the spoon as he twisted his 
head around in tight circles. 

But I had more tricks up my sleeve. I poked him in the chest, with my free hand, in a 
manner calculated to annoy. He didn't budge. I did it again. And again. And again. Not 
hard-but not in a manner to be ignored, either. Ten or so pokes letter, he opened his 
mouth, planning to emit a sound of outrage. Hah! His mistake. I deftly inserted the 
spoon. He tried, gamely, to force out the offending food with his tongue. But I know how 
to deal with that, too. I just placed my forefinger horizontally across his lips. Some came 


98 


out. But some was swallowed, too. Score one for Dad. I gave him a pat on the head, and 
told him that he was a good boy. And I meant it. When someone does something you are 
trying to get them to do, reward them. No grudge after victory. An hour later, it was all 
over. There was outrage. There was some wailing. My wife had to leave the room. The 
stress was too much. But food was eaten by child. My son collapsed, exhausted, on my 
chest. We had a nap together. And he liked me a lot better when he woke up than he had 
before he was disciplined. 

This was something I commonly observed when we went head to head-and not only 
with him. A little later we entered into a babysitting swap with another couple. All the 
kids would get together at one house. Then one pair of parents would go out to dinner, or 
a movie, and leave the other pair to watch the children, who were all under three. One 
evening, another set of parents joined us. I was unfamiliar with their son, a large, strong 
boy of two. 

"He won't sleep," said his father. "After you put him to bed, he will crawl out of his 
bed, and come downstairs. We usually put on an Elmo video and let him watch it." 

"There's no damn way I'm rewarding a recalcitrant child for unacceptable behaviour," I 
thought, "and I'm certainly not showing anyone any Elmo video." I always hated that 
creepy, whiny puppet. He was a disgrace to Jim Henson's legacy. So reward-by-Elmo was 
not on the table. I didn't say anything, of course. There is just no talking to parents about 
their children-until they are ready to listen. 

Two hours later, we put the kids to bed. Four of the five went promptly to sleep-but 
not the Muppet aficionado. I had placed him in a crib, however, so he couldn't escape. But 
he could still howl, and that's exactly what he did. That was tricky. It was good strategy 
on his part. It was annoying, and it threatened to wake up all the other kids, who would 
then also start to howl. Score one for the kid. So, I journeyed into the bedroom. "Lie 
down," I said. That produced no effect. "Lie down," I said, "or I will lay you down." 
Reasoning with kids isn't often of too much use, particularly under such circumstances, 
but I believe in fair warning. Of course, he didn't lie down. He howled again, for effect. 

Kids do this frequently. Scared parents think that a crying child is always sad or hurt. 
This is simply not true. Anger is one of the most common reasons for crying. Careful 
analysis of the musculature patterns of crying children has confirmed this.- Anger- 
crying and fear-or-sadness crying do not look the same. They also don't sound the same, 
and can be distinguished with careful attention. Anger-crying is often an act of 
dominance, and should be dealt with as such. I lifted him up, and laid him down. Gently. 
Patiently. But firmly. He got up. I laid him down. He got up. I laid him down. He got up. 
This time, I laid him down, and kept my hand on his back. He struggled, mightily, but 
ineffectually. He was, after all, only one-tenth my size. I could take him with one hand. 
So, I kept him down and spoke calmly to him and told him he was a good boy and that he 
should relax. I gave him a soother and pounded gently on his back. He started to relax. 
His eyes began to close. I removed my hand. 

He promptly got to his feet. I was impressed. The kid had spirit! I lifted him up, and 
laid him down, again. "Lie down, monster," I said. I pounded his back gently some more. 
Some kids find that soothing. He was getting tired. He was ready to capitulate. He closed 
his eyes. I got to my feet, and headed quietly and quickly to the door. I glanced back, to 
check his position, one last time. He was back on his feet. I pointed my finger at him. 
"Down, monster," I said, and I meant it. He went down like a shot. I closed the door. We 
liked each other. Neither my wife nor I heard a peep out of him for the rest of the night. 

"How was the kid?" his father asked me when he got home, much later that night. 
"Good," I said. "No problem at all. He's asleep right now." 

"Did he get up?" said his father. 

"No," I said. "He slept the whole time." 


99 


Dad looked at me. He wanted to know. But he didn't ask. And I didn't tell. 

Don't cast pearls before swine, as the old saying goes. And you might think that's 
harsh. But training your child not to sleep, and rewarding him with the antics of a creepy 
puppet? That's harsh too. You pick your poison, and I'll pick mine. 

Discipline and Punish 

Modern parents are terrified of two frequently juxtaposed words: discipline and punish. 
They evoke images of prisons, soldiers and jackboots. The distance between disciplinarian 
and tyrant or punishment and torture is, indeed, easily traversed. Discipline and punish 
must be handled with care. The fear is unsurprising. But both are necessary. They can be 
applied unconsciously or consciously, badly or well, but there is no escaping their use. 

It's not that it's impossible to discipline with reward. In fact, rewarding good behaviour 
can be very effective. The most famous of all behavioural psychologists, B.F. Skinner, was 
a great advocate of this approach. He was expert at it. He taught pigeons to play ping- 
pong, although they only rolled the ball back and forth by pecking it with their beaks. 
But they were pigeons. So even though they played badly, it was still pretty good. Skinner 
even taught his birds to pilot missiles during the Second World War, in Project Pigeon 
(later Orcon). He got a long way, before the invention of electronic guidance systems 
rendered his efforts obsolete. 

Skinner observed the animals he was training to perform such acts with exceptional 
care. Any actions that approximated what he was aiming at were immediately followed by 
a reward of just the right size: not small enough to be inconsequential, and not so large 
that it devalued future rewards. Such an approach can be used with children, and works 
very well. Imagine that you would like your toddler to help set the table. It's a useful skill. 
You'd like him better if he could do it. It would be good for his (shudder) self-esteem. So, 
you break the target behaviour down into its component parts. One element of setting the 
table is carrying a plate from the cupboard to the table. Even that might be too complex. 
Perhaps your child has only been walking a few months. He's still wobbly and unreliable. 
So, you start his training by handing him a plate and having him hand it back. A pat on 
the head could follow. You might turn it into a game. Pass with your left. Switch to your 
right. Circle around your back. Then you might give him a plate and take a few steps 
backward so that he has to traverse a few steps before giving it back. Train him to become 
a plate-handling virtuoso. Don't leave him trapped in his klutz-dom. 

You can teach virtually anyone anything with such an approach. First, figure out what 
you want. Then, watch the people around you like a hawk. Finally, whenever you see 
anything a bit more like what you want, swoop in (hawk, remember) and deliver a 
reward. Your daughter has been very reserved since she became a teenager. You wish she 
would talk more. That's the target: more communicative daughter. One morning, over 
breakfast, she shares an anecdote about school. That's an excellent time to pay attention. 
That's the reward. Stop texting and listen. Unless you don't want her to tell you anything 
ever again. 

Parental interventions that make children happy clearly can and should be used to 
shape behaviour. The same goes for husbands, wives, co-workers and parents. Skinner, 
however, was a realist. He noted that use of reward was very difficult: the observer had to 
attend patiently until the target spontaneously manifested the desired behaviour, and 
then reinforce. This required a lot of time, and a lot of waiting, and that's a problem. He 
also had to starve his animals down to three-quarters of their normal body weight before 
they would become interested enough in food reward to truly pay attention. But these are 
not the only shortcomings of the purely positive approach. 


100 


Negative emotions, like their positive counterparts, help us learn. We need to learn, 
because we're stupid and easily damaged. We can die. That's not good, and we don't feel 
good about it. If we did, we would seek death, and then we would die. We don't even feel 
good about dying if it only might happen. And that's all the time. In that manner, negative 
emotions, for all their unpleasantness, protect us. We feel hurt and scared and ashamed 
and disgusted so we can avoid damage. And we're susceptible to feeling such things a lot. 
In fact, we feel more negative about a loss of a given size than we feel good about the 
same-sized gain. Pain is more potent than pleasure, and anxiety more than hope. 

Emotions, positive and negative, come in two usefully differentiated variants. 
Satisfaction (technically, satiation) tells us that what we did was good, while hope 
(technically, incentive reward) indicates that something pleasurable is on the way. Pain 
hurts us, so we won't repeat actions that produced personal damage or social isolation (as 
loneliness is also, technically, a form of pain). Anxiety makes us stay away from hurtful 
people and bad places so we don't have to feel pain. All these emotions must be balanced 
against each other, and carefully judged in context, but they're all required to keep us 
alive and thriving. We therefore do our children a disservice by failing to use whatever is 
available to help them learn, including negative emotions, even though such use should 
occur in the most merciful possible manner. 

Skinner knew that threats and punishments could stop unwanted behaviours, just as 
reward reinforces what is desirable. In a world paralyzed at the thought of interfering 
with the hypothetically pristine path of natural child development, it can be difficult even 
to discuss the former techniques. However, children would not have such a lengthy 
period of natural development, prior to maturity, if their behaviour did not have to be 
shaped. They would just leap out of the womb, ready to trade stocks. Children also 
cannot be fully sheltered from fear and pain. They are small and vulnerable. They don't 
know much about the world. Even when they are doing something as natural as learning 
to walk, they're constantly being walloped by the world. And this is to say nothing of the 
frustration and rejection they inevitably experience when dealing with siblings and peers 
and uncooperative, stubborn adults. Given this, the fundamental moral question is not 
how to shelter children completely from misadventure and failure, so they never 
experience any fear or pain, but how to maximize their learning so that useful knowledge 
may be gained with minimal cost. 

In the Disney movie Sleeping Beauty, the King and Queen have a daughter, the princess 
Aurora, after a long wait. They plan a great christening, to introduce her to the world. 
They welcome everyone who loves and honours their new daughter. But they fail to invite 
Maleficent (malicious, malevolent), who is essentially Queen of the Underworld, or 
Nature in her negative guise. This means, symbolically, that the two monarchs are 
overprotecting their beloved daughter, by setting up a world around her that has nothing 
negative in it. But this does not protect her. It makes her weak. Maleficent curses the 
princess, sentencing her to death at the age of sixteen, caused by the prick of a spinning 
wheel's needle. The spinning wheel is the wheel of fate; the prick, which produces blood, 
symbolizes the loss of virginity, a sign of the emergence of the woman from the child. 

Fortunately, a good fairy (the positive element of Nature) reduces the punishment to 
unconsciousness, redeemable with love's first kiss. The panicked King and Queen get rid 
of all the spinning wheels in the land, and turn their daughter over to the much-too-nice 
good fairies, of whom there are three. They continue with their strategy of removing all 
dangerous things-but in doing so they leave their daughter naive, immature and weak. 
One day, just before Aurora's sixteenth birthday, she meets a prince in the forest, and 
falls in love, the same day. By any reasonable standard, that's a bit much. Then she loudly 
bemoans the fact that she is to be wed to Prince Philip, to whom she was betrothed as a 
child, and collapses emotionally when she is brought back to her parents' castle for her 


101 



birthday. It is at that moment that Maleficent's curse manifests itself. A portal opens up 
in the castle, a spinning wheel appears, and Aurora pricks her finger and falls 
unconscious. She becomes Sleeping Beauty. In doing so (again, symbolically speaking) 
she chooses unconsciousness over the terror of adult life. Something existentially similar 
to this often occurs very frequently with overprotected children, who can be brought low 
-and then desire the bliss of unconsciousness-by their first real contact with failure or, 
worse, genuine malevolence, which they do not or will not understand and against which 
they have no defence. 

Take the case of the three-year-old who has not learned to share. She displays her 
selfish behaviour in the presence of her parents, but they're too nice to intervene. More 
truthfully, they refuse to pay attention, admit to what is happening, and teach her how to 
act properly. They're annoyed, of course, when she won't share with her sister, but they 
pretend everything is OK. It's not OK. They'll snap at her later, for something totally 
unrelated. She will be hurt by that, and confused, but learn nothing. Worse: when she 
tries to make friends, it won't go well, because of her lack of social sophistication. 
Children her own age will be put off by her inability to cooperate. They'll fight with her, 
or wander off and find someone else to play with. The parents of those children will 
observe her awkwardness and misbehaviour, and won't invite her back to play with their 
kids. She will be lonely and rejected. That will produce anxiety, depression and 
resentment. That will produce the turning from life that is equivalent to the wish for 
unconsciousness. 

Parents who refuse to adopt the responsibility for disciplining their children think they 
can just opt out of the conflict necessary for proper child-rearing. They avoid being the 
bad guy (in the short term). But they do not at all rescue or protect their children from 
fear and pain. Quite the contrary: the judgmental and uncaring broader social world will 
mete out conflict and punishment far greater than that which would have been delivered 
by an awake parent. You can discipline your children, or you can turn that responsibility 
over to the harsh, uncaring judgmental world-and the motivation for the latter decision 
should never be confused with love. 

You might object, as modern parents sometimes do: why should a child even be subject 
to the arbitrary dictates of a parent? In fact, there is a new variant of politically correct 
thinking that presumes that such an idea is "adultism:"L a form of prejudice and 
oppression analogous to, say, sexism or racism. The question of adult authority must be 
answered with care. That requires a thorough examination of the question itself. 
Accepting an objection as formulated is halfway to accepting its validity, and that can be 
dangerous if the question is ill-posed. Let's break it down. 

First, why should a child be subject? That's easy. Every child must listen to and obey 
adults because he or she is dependent on the care that one or more imperfect grown-ups 
is willing to bestow. Given this, it is better for the child to act in a manner that invites 
genuine affection and goodwill. Something even better might be imagined. The child 
could act in a manner that simultaneously ensures optimal adult attention, in a manner 
that benefits his or her present state of being and future development. That's a very high 
standard, but it's in the best interests of the child, so there is every reason to aspire to it. 

Every child should also be taught to comply gracefully with the expectations of civil 
society. This does not mean crushed into mindless ideological conformity. It means 
instead that parents must reward those attitudes and actions that will bring their child 
success in the world outside the family, and use threat and punishment when necessary 
to eliminate behaviours that will lead to misery and failure. There's a tight window of 
opportunity for this, as well, so getting it right quickly matters. If a child has not been 
taught to behave properly by the age of four, it will forever be difficult for him or her to 
make friends. The research literature is quite clear on this. This matters, because peers 


102 


are the primary source of socialization after the age of four. Rejected children cease to 
develop, because they are alienated from their peers. They fall further and further behind, 
as the other children continue to progress. Thus, the friendless child too often becomes 
the lonely, antisocial or depressed teenager and adult. This is not good. Much more of our 
sanity than we commonly realize is a consequence of our fortunate immersion in a social 
community. We must be continually reminded to think and act properly. When we drift, 
people that care for and love us nudge us in small ways and large back on track. So, we 
better have some of those people around. 

It's also not the case (back to the question) that adult dictates are all arbitrary. That's 
only true in a dysfunctional totalitarian state. But in civilized, open societies, the majority 
abide by a functional social contract, aimed at mutual betterment-or at least at existence 
in close proximity without too much violence. Even a system of rules that allows for only 
that minimum contract is by no means arbitrary, given the alternatives. If a society does 
not adequately reward productive, pro-social behavior, insists upon distributing resources 
in a markedly arbitrary and unfair manner, and allows for theft and exploitation, it will 
not remain conflict-free for long. If its hierarchies are based only (or even primarily) on 
power, instead of the competence necessary to get important and difficult things done, it 
will be prone to collapse, as well. This is even true, in simpler form, of the hierarchies of 
chimpanzees, which is an indication of its fundamental, biological and non-arbitrary 
emergent truth. 

Poorly socialized children have terrible lives. Thus, it is better to socialize them 
optimally. Some of this can be done with reward, but not all of it. The issue is therefore 
not whether to use punishment and threat. The issue is whether to do it consciously and 
thoughtfully. How, then, should children be disciplined? This is a very difficult question, 
because children (and parents) differ vastly in their temperaments. Some children are 
agreeable. They deeply want to please, but pay for that with a tendency to be conflict- 
averse and dependent. Others are tougher-minded and more independent. Those kids 
want to do what they want, when they want, all the time. They can be challenging, non- 
compliant and stubborn. Some children are desperate for rules and structure, and are 
content even in rigid environments. Others, with little regard for predictability and 
routine, are immune to demands for even minimal necessary order. Some are wildly 
imaginative and creative, and others more concrete and conservative. These are all deep, 
important differences, heavily influenced by biological factors and difficult to modify 
socially. It is fortunate indeed that in the face of such variability we are the beneficiaries 
of much thoughtful meditation on the proper use of social control. 

Minimum Necessary Force 

Here's a straightforward initial idea: rules should not be multiplied beyond necessity. 
Alternatively stated, bad laws drive out respect for good laws. This is the ethical-even 
legal-equivalent of Occam's razor, the scientist's conceptual guillotine, which states that 
the simplest possible hypothesis is preferable. So, don't encumber children-or their 
disciplinarians-with too many rules. That path leads to frustration. 

Limit the rules. Then, figure out what to do when one of them gets broken. A general, 
context-independent rule for punishment severity is hard to establish. However, a helpful 
norm has already been enshrined in English common law, one of the great products of 
Western civilization. Its analysis can help us establish a second useful principle. 

English common law allows you to defend your rights, but only in a reasonable manner. 
Someone breaks into your house. You have a loaded pistol. You have a right to defend 
yourself, but it's better to do it in stages. What if it's a drunk and confused neighbour? 
"Shoot 'em!" you think. But it's not that simple. So, you say, instead, "Stop! I have a 


103 


gun." If that produces neither explanation nor retreat, you might consider a warning shot. 
Then, if the perpetrator still advances, you might take aim at his leg. (Don't mistake any 
of this for legal advice. It's an example.) A single brilliantly practical principle can be used 
to generate all these incrementally more severe reactions: that of minimum necessary 
force. So now we have two general principles of discipline. The first: limit the rules. The 
second: Use the least force necessary to enforce those rules. 

About the first principle, you might ask, "Limit the rules to what, exactly?" Here are 
some suggestions. Do not bite, kick or hit, except in self-defence. Do not torture and 
bully other children, so you don't end up in jail. Eat in a civilized and thankful manner, so 
that people are happy to have you at their house, and pleased to feed you. Learn to share, 
so other kids will play with you. Pay attention when spoken to by adults, so they don't 
hate you and might therefore deign to teach you something. Go to sleep properly, and 
peaceably, so that your parents can have a private life and not resent your existence. Take 
care of your belongings, because you need to learn how and because you're lucky to have 
them. Be good company when something fun is happening, so that you're invited for the 
fun. Act so that other people are happy you're around, so that people will want you 
around. A child who knows these rules will be welcome everywhere. 

About the second, equally important principle, your question might be: What is 
minimum necessary force? This must be established experimentally, starting with the 
smallest possible intervention. Some children will be turned to stone by a glare. A verbal 
command will stop another. A thumb-cocked flick of the index finger on a small hand 
might be necessary for some. Such a strategy is particularly useful in public places such as 
restaurants. It can be administered suddenly, quietly and effectively, without risking 
escalation. What's the alternative? A child who is crying angrily, demanding attention, is 
not making himself popular. A child who is running from table to table and disrupting 
everyone's peace is bringing disgrace (an old word, but a good one) on himself and his 
parents. Such outcomes are far from optimal, and children will definitely misbehave more 
in public, because they are experimenting: trying to establish if the same old rules also 
apply in the new place. They don't sort that out verbally, not when they are under three. 

When our children were little and we took them to restaurants, they attracted smiles. 
They sat nicely and ate politely. They couldn't keep it up for long, but we didn't keep 
them there too long. When they started to get antsy, after sitting for forty-five minutes, 
we knew it was time to go. That was part of the deal. Nearby diners would tell us how 
nice it was to see a happy family. We weren't always happy, and our children weren't 
always properly behaved. But they were most of the time, and it was wonderful to see 
people responding so positively to their presence. It was truly good for the kids. They 
could see that people liked them. This also reinforced their good behaviour. That was the 
reward. 

People will really like your kids if you give them the chance. This is something I learned 
as soon as we had our first baby, our daughter, Mikhaila. When we took her down the 
street in her little foldup stroller in our French Montreal working-class neighbourhood, 
rough-looking heavy-drinking lumberjack types would stop in their tracks and smile at 
her. They would coo and giggle and make stupid faces. Watching people respond to 
children restores your faith in human nature. All that's multiplied when your kids behave 
in public. To ensure that such things happen, you have to discipline your children 
carefully and effectively-and to do that, you have to know something about reward, and 
about punishment, instead of shying away from the knowledge. 

Part of establishing a relationship with your son or daughter is learning how that small 
person responds to disciplinary intervention-and then intervening effectively. It's very 
easy to mouth cliches instead, such as: "There is no excuse for physical punishment," or, 
"Hitting children merely teaches them to hit." Let's start with the former claim: there is no 


104 



excuse for physical punishment. First, we should note the widespread consensus around the 
idea that some forms of misbehavior, particularly those associated with theft and assault, 
are both wrong and should be subject to sanction. Second, we should note that almost all 
those sanctions involve punishment in its many psychological and more directly physical 
forms. Deprivation of liberty causes pain in a manner essentially similar to that of 
physical trauma. The same can be said of the use of social isolation (including time out). 
We know this neurobiologically. The same brain areas mediate response to all three, and 
all are ameliorated by the same class of drugs, opiates. Jail is clearly physical 
punishment-particularly solitary confinement-even when nothing violent happens. 
Third, we should note that some misbegotten actions must be brought to a halt both 
effectively and immediately, not least so that something worse doesn't happen. What's 
the proper punishment for someone who will not stop poking a fork into an electrical 
socket? Or who runs away laughing in a crowded supermarket parking lot? The answer is 
simple: whatever will stop it fastest, within reason. Because the alternative could be fatal. 

That's pretty obvious, in the case of parking lot or outlet. But the same thing applies in 
the social realm, and that brings us to the fourth point regarding excuses for physical 
punishment. The penalties for misbehavior (of the sort that could have been effectively 
halted in childhood) become increasingly severe as children get older-and it is 
disproportionately those who remain unsocialized effectively by age four who end up 
punished explicitly by society in their later youth and early adulthood. Those 
unconstrained four-year-olds, in turn, are often those who were unduly aggressive, by 
nature, at age two. They were statistically more likely than their peers to kick, hit, bite 
and take away toys (later known as stealing). They comprise about five per cent of boys, 
and a much smaller percentage of girls. To unthinkingly parrot the magic line "There is 
no excuse for physical punishment" is also to foster the delusion that teenage devils 
magically emerge from once-innocent little child-angels. You're not doing your child any 
favors by overlooking any misbehavior (particularly if he or she is temperamentally more 
aggressive). 

To hold the no excuse for physical punishment theory is also (fifth) to assume that the 
word no can be effectively uttered to another person in the absence of the threat of 
punishment. A woman can say no to a powerful, narcissistic man only because she has 
social norms, the law and the state backing her up. A parent can only say no to a child 
who wants a third piece of cake because he or she is larger, stronger and more capable 
than the child (and is additionally backed up in his authority by law and state). What no 
means, in the final analysis, is always "If you continue to do that, something you do not 
like will happen to you." Otherwise it means nothing. Or, worse, it means "another 
nonsensical nothing muttered by ignorable adults." Or, worse still, it means, "all adults 
are ineffectual and weak." This is a particularly bad lesson, when every child's destiny is 
to become an adult, and when most things that are learned without undue personal pain 
are modelled or explicitly taught by adults). What does a child who ignores adults and 
holds them in contempt have to look forward to? Why grow up at all? And that's the 
story of Peter Pan, who thinks all adults are variants of Captain Hook, tyrannical and 
terrified of his own mortality (think hungry crocodile with clock in his stomach). The 
only time no ever means no in the absence of violence is when it is uttered by one civilized 
person to another. 

And what about the idea that hitting a child merely teaches them to hit ? First: No. Wrong. 
Too simple. For starters, "hitting" is a very unsophisticated word to describe the 
disciplinary act of an effective parent. If "hitting" accurately described the entire range of 
physical force, then there would be no difference between rain droplets and atom bombs. 
Magnitude matters-and so does context, if we're not being wilfully blind and naive about 
the issue. Every child knows the difference between being bitten by a mean, unprovoked 


105 


dog and being nipped by his own pet when he tries playfully but too carelessly to take its 
bone. How hard someone is hit, and why they are hit, cannot merely be ignored when 
speaking of hitting. Timing, part of context, is also of crucial importance. If you flick your 
two-year-old with your finger just after he smacks the baby on the head with a wooden 
block, he will get the connection, and be at least somewhat less willing to smack her 
again in the future. That seems like a good outcome. He certainly won't conclude that he 
should hit her more, using the flick of his mother's finger as an example. He's not stupid. 
He's just jealous, impulsive and not very sophisticated. And how else are you going to 
protect his younger sibling? If you discipline ineffectively, then the baby will suffer. 
Maybe for years. The bullying will continue, because you won't do a damn thing to stop 
it. You'll avoid the conflict that's necessary to establish peace. You'll turn a blind eye. 
And then later, when the younger child confronts you (maybe even in adulthood), you'll 
say, "I never knew it was like that." You just didn't want to know. So, you didn't. You just 
rejected the responsibility of discipline, and justified it with a continual show of your 
niceness. Every gingerbread house has a witch inside it that devours children. 

So where does all that leave us? With the decision to discipline effectively, or to 
discipline ineffectively (but never the decision to forego discipline altogether, because 
nature and society will punish in a draconian manner whatever errors of childhood 
behavior remain uncorrected). So here are a few practical hints: time out can be an 
extremely effective form of punishment, particularly if the misbehaving child is welcome 
as soon as he controls his temper. An angry child should sit by himself until he calms 
down. Then he should be allowed to return to normal life. That means the child wins- 
instead of his anger. The rule is "Come be with us as soon as you can behave properly." 
This is a very good deal for child, parent and society. You'll be able to tell if your child has 
really regained control. You'll like him again, despite his earlier misbehaviour. If you're 
still mad, maybe he hasn't completely repented-or maybe you should do something 
about your tendency to hold a grudge. 

If your child is the kind of determined varmint who simply runs away, laughing, when 
placed on the steps or in his room, physical restraint might have to be added to the time 
out routine. A child can be held carefully but firmly by the upper arms, until he or she 
stops squirming and pays attention. If that fails, being turned over a parent's knee might 
be required. For the child who is pushing the limits in a spectacularly inspired way, a 
swat across the backside can indicate requisite seriousness on the part of a responsible 
adult. There are some situations in which even that will not suffice, partly because some 
children are very determined, exploratory, and tough, or because the offending behaviour 
is truly severe. And if you're not thinking such things through, then you're not acting 
responsibly as a parent. You're leaving the dirty work to someone else, who will be much 
dirtier doing it. 

A Summary of Principles 

Disciplinary principle 1: limit the rules. Principle 2: use minimum necessary force. Here's a 
third: parents should come in pairs.- Raising young children is demanding and exhausting. 
Because of this, it's easy for a parent to make a mistake. Insomnia, hunger, the aftermath 
of an argument, a hangover, a bad day at work-any of these things singly can make a 
person unreasonable, while in combination they can produce someone dangerous. Under 
such circumstances, it is necessary to have someone else around, to observe, and step in, 
and discuss. This will make it less likely that a whiny provocative child and her fed-up 
cranky parent will excite each other to the point of no return. Parents should come in 
pairs so the father of a newborn can watch the new mother so she won't get worn out and 
do something desperate after hearing her colicky baby wail from eleven in the evening 


106 


until five in the morning for thirty nights in a row. I am not saying we should be mean to 
single mothers, many of whom struggle impossibly and courageously-and a proportion 
of whom have had to escape, singly, from a brutal relationship-but that doesn't mean we 
should pretend that all family forms are equally viable. They're not. Period. 

Here's a fourth principle, one that is more particularly psychological: parents should 
understand their own capacity to be harsh, vengeful, arrogant, resentful, angry and deceitful. Very 
few people set out, consciously, to do a terrible job as father or mother, but bad parenting 
happens all the time. This is because people have a great capacity for evil, as well as good 
-and because they remain willfully blind to that fact. People are aggressive and selfish, as 
well as kind and thoughtful. For this reason, no adult human being-no hierarchical, 
predatory ape-can truly tolerate being dominated by an upstart child. Revenge will come. 
Ten minutes after a pair of all-too-nice-and-patient parents have failed to prevent a public 
tantrum at the local supermarket, they will pay their toddler back with the cold shoulder 
when he runs up, excited, to show mom and dad his newest accomplishment. Enough 
embarrassment, disobedience, and dominance challenge, and even the most 
hypothetically selfless parent will become resentful. And then the real punishment will 
begin. Resentment breeds the desire for vengeance. Fewer spontaneous offers of love will 
be offered, with more rationalizations for their absence. Fewer opportunities for the 
personal development of the child will be sought out. A subtle turning away will begin. 
And this is only the beginning of the road to total familial warfare, conducted mostly in 
the underworld, underneath the false facade of normality and love. 

This frequently-travelled path is much better avoided. A parent who is seriously aware 
of his or her limited tolerance and capacity for misbehaviour when provoked can therefore 
seriously plan a proper disciplinary strategy-particularly if monitored by an equally 
awake partner-and never let things degenerate to the point where genuine hatred 
emerges. Beware. There are toxic families everywhere. They make no rules and limit no 
misbehaviour. The parents lash out randomly and unpredictably. The children live in that 
chaos and are crushed, if they're timid, or rebel, counterproductively, if they're tough. It's 
not good. It can get murderous. 

Here's a fifth and final and most general principle. Parents have a duty to act as proxies 
for the real world-merciful proxies, caring proxies-but proxies, nonetheless. This 
obligation supersedes any responsibility to ensure happiness, foster creativity, or boost 
self-esteem. It is the primary duty of parents to make their children socially desirable. 
That will provide the child with opportunity, self-regard, and security. It's more important 
even than fostering individual identity. That Holy Grail can only be pursued, in any case, 
after a high degree of social sophistication has been established. 

The Good Child-and the Responsible Parent 

A properly socialized three-year-old is polite and engaging. She's also no pushover. She 
evokes interest from other children and appreciation from adults. She exists in a world 
where other kids welcome her and compete for her attention, and where adults are happy 
to see her, instead of hiding behind false smiles. She will be introduced to the world by 
people who are pleased to do so. This will do more for her eventual individuality than any 
cowardly parental attempt to avoid day-to-day conflict and discipline. 

Discuss your likes and dislikes with regards to your children with your partner or, 
failing that, a friend. But do not be afraid to have likes and dislikes. You can judge 
suitable from unsuitable, and wheat from chaff. You realize the difference between good 
and evil. Having clarified your stance-having assessed yourself for pettiness, arrogance 
and resentment-you take the next step, and you make your children behave. You take 
responsibility for their discipline. You take responsibility for the mistakes you will 


107 



inevitably make while disciplining. You can apologize, when you're wrong, and learn to 
do better. 

You love your kids, after all. If their actions make you dislike them, think what an effect 
they will have on other people, who care much less about them than you. Those other 
people will punish them, severely, by omission or commission. Don't allow that to 
happen. Better to let your little monsters know what is desirable and what is not, so they 
become sophisticated denizens of the world outside the family. 

A child who pays attention, instead of drifting, and can play, and does not whine, and is 
comical, but not annoying, and is trustworthy-that child will have friends wherever he 
goes. His teachers will like him, and so will his parents. If he attends politely to adults, he 
will be attended to, smiled at and happily instructed. He will thrive, in what can so easily 
be a cold, unforgiving and hostile world. Clear rules make for secure children and calm, 
rational parents. Clear principles of discipline and punishment balance mercy and justice 
so that social development and psychological maturity can be optimally promoted. Clear 
rules and proper discipline help the child, and the family, and society, establish, maintain 
and expand the order that is all that protects us from chaos and the terrors of the 
underworld, where everything is uncertain, anxiety-provoking, hopeless and depressing. 
There are no greater gifts that a committed and courageous parent can bestow. 

Do not let your children do anything that makes you dislike them. 


108 



/** 

VS 


109 




























a 


111 


RULE 6 


SET YOUR HOUSE IN PERFECT ORDER BEFORE YOU 
CRITICIZE THE WORLD 


A RELIGIOUS PROBLEM 

It does not seem reasonable to describe the young man who shot twenty children and six 
staff members at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, in 2012 as a 
religious person. This is equally true for the Colorado theatre gunman and the Columbine 
High School killers. But these murderous individuals had a problem with reality that 
existed at a religious depth. As one of the members of the Columbine duo wrote: 

The human race isn't worth fighting for, only worth killing. Give the Earth back to the animals. They deserve it 
infinitely more than we do. Nothing means anything anymore. 

People who think such things view Being itself as inequitable and harsh to the point of 
corruption, and human Being, in particular, as contemptible. They appoint themselves 
supreme adjudicators of reality and find it wanting. They are the ultimate critics. The 
deeply cynical writer continues: 

If you recall your history, the Nazis came up with a "final solution" to the Jewish problem.... Kill them all. Well, 
in case you haven't figured it out, I say "KILL MANKIND." No one should survive. 

For such individuals, the world of experience is insufficient and evil-so to hell with 
everything! 

What is happening when someone comes to think in this manner? A great German 
play, Faust: A Tragedy, written by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, addresses that issue. The 
play's main character, a scholar named Heinrich Faust, trades his immortal soul to the 
devil, Mephistopheles. In return, he receives whatever he desires while still alive on 
Earth. In Goethe's play, Mephistopheles is the eternal adversary of Being. He has a 
central, defining credo: 

I am the spirit who negates 

and rightly so, for all that comes to be 

deserves to perish, wretchedly. 

It were better nothing would begin! 

Thus everything that your terms sin, 
destruction, evil represent - 
that is my proper element. 

Goethe considered this hateful sentiment so important-so key to the central element of 
vengeful human destructiveness-that he had Mephistopheles say it a second time, 
phrased somewhat differently, in Part II of the play, written many years later. 

People think often in the Mephistophelean manner, although they seldom act upon 
their thoughts as brutally as the mass murderers of school, college and theatre. Whenever 
we experience injustice, real or imagined; whenever we encounter tragedy or fall prey to 
the machinations of others; whenever we experience the horror and pain of our own 
apparently arbitrary limitations-the temptation to question Being and then to curse it 
rises foully from the darkness. Why must innocent people suffer so terribly? What kind of 
bloody, horrible planet is this, anyway? 

Life is in truth very hard. Everyone is destined for pain and slated for destruction. 
Sometimes suffering is clearly the result of a personal fault such as willful blindness, poor 
decision-making or malevolence. In such cases, when it appears to be self-inflicted, it may 
even seem just. People get what they deserve, you might contend. That's cold comfort, 


112 


however, even when true. Sometimes, if those who are suffering changed their behaviour, 
then their lives would unfold less tragically. But human control is limited. Susceptibility 
to despair, disease, aging and death is universal. In the final analysis, we do not appear to 
be the architects of our own fragility. Whose fault is it, then? 

People who are very ill (or, worse, who have a sick child) will inevitably find 
themselves asking this question, whether they are religious believers or not. The same is 
true of someone who finds his shirtsleeve caught in the gears of a giant bureaucracy- 
who is suffering through a tax audit, or fighting an interminable lawsuit or divorce. And 
it's not only the obviously suffering who are tormented by the need to blame someone or 
something for the intolerable state of their Being. At the height of his fame, influence and 
creative power, for example, the towering Leo Tolstoy himself began to question the value 
of human existence. He reasoned in this way: 

My position was terrible. I knew that I could find nothing in the way of rational knowledge except a denial of 
life; and in faith I could find nothing except a denial of reason, and this was even more impossible than a denial 
of life. According to rational knowledge, it followed that life is evil, and people know it. They do not have to 
live, yet they have lived and they do live, just as I myself had lived, even though I had known for a long time 
that life is meaningless and evil. 

Try as he might, Tolstoy could identify only four means of escaping from such thoughts. 
One was retreating into childlike ignorance of the problem. Another was pursuing 
mindless pleasure. The third was "continuing to drag out a life that is evil and 
meaningless, knowing beforehand that nothing can come of it." He identified that 
particular form of escape with weakness: "The people in this category know that death is 
better than life, but they do not have the strength to act rationally and quickly put an end 
to the delusion by killing themselves...." 

Only the fourth and final mode of escape involved "strength and energy. It consists of 
destroying life, once one has realized that life is evil and meaningless." Tolstoy 
relentlessly followed his thoughts: 

Only unusually strong and logically consistent people act in this manner. Having realized all the stupidity of the 
joke that is being played on us and seeing that the blessings of the dead are greater than those of the living and 
that it is better not to exist, they act and put an end to this stupid joke; and they use any means of doing it: a 
rope around the neck, water, a knife in the heart, a train. 

Tolstoy wasn't pessimistic enough. The stupidity of the joke being played on us does not 
merely motivate suicide. It motivates murder-mass murder, often followed by suicide. 
That is a far more effective existential protest. By June of 2016, unbelievable as it may 
seem, there had been one thousand mass killings (defined as four or more people shot in 
a single incident, excluding the shooter) in the US in twelve hundred and sixty days. 
That's one such event on five of every six days for more than three years. Everyone says, 
"We don't understand." How can we still pretend that? Tolstoy understood, more than a 
century ago. The ancient authors of the biblical story of Cain and Abel understood, as 
well, more than twenty centuries ago. They described murder as the first act of post- 
Edenic history: and not just murder, but fratricidal murder-murder not only of someone 
innocent but of someone ideal and good, and murder done consciously to spite the creator 
of the universe. Today's killers tell us the same thing, in their own words. Who would 
dare say that this is not the worm at the core of the apple? But we will not listen, because 
the truth cuts too close to the bone. Even for a mind as profound as that of the celebrated 
Russian author, there was no way out. How can the rest of us manage, when a man of 
Tolstoy's stature admits defeat? For years, he hid his guns from himself and would not 
walk with a rope in hand, in case he hanged himself. 

How can a person who is awake avoid outrage at the world? 

Vengeance or Transformation 


113 


A religious man might shake his fist in desperation at the apparent injustice and 
blindness of God. Even Christ Himself felt abandoned before the cross, or so the story 
goes. A more agnostic or atheistic individual might blame fate, or meditate bitterly on the 
brutality of chance. Another might tear himself apart, searching for the character flaws 
underlying his suffering and deterioration. These are all variations on a theme. The name 
of the target changes, but the underlying psychology remains constant. Why? Why is 
there so much suffering and cruelty? 

Well, perhaps it really is God's doing-or the fault of blind, pointless fate, if you are 
inclined to think that way. And there appears to be every reason to think that way. But, 
what happens if you do? Mass murderers believe that the suffering attendant upon 
existence justifies judgment and revenge, as the Columbine boys so clearly indicated: 

I will sooner die than betray my own thoughts. Before I leave this worthless place, I will kill who ever I deem 
unfit for anything, especially life. If you pissed me off in the past, you will die if I see you. You might be able to 
piss off others, and have it eventually all blow over, but not me. I don't forget people who wronged me. 

One of the most vengeful murderers of the twentieth century, the terrible Carl Panzram, 
was raped, brutalized and betrayed in the Minnesota institution responsible for his 
"rehabilitation" when he was a delinquent juvenile. He emerged, enraged beyond 
measure, as burglar, arsonist, rapist and serial killer. He aimed consciously and 
consistently at destruction, even keeping track of the dollar value of the property he 
burned. He started by hating the individuals who had hurt him. His resentment grew, 
until his hatred encompassed all of mankind, and he didn't stop there. His 
destructiveness was aimed in some fundamental manner at God Himself. There is no 
other way of phrasing it. Panzram raped, murdered and burned to express his outrage at 
Being. He acted as if Someone was responsible. The same thing happens in the story of 
Cain and Abel. Cain's sacrifices are rejected. He exists in suffering. He calls out God and 
challenges the Being He created. God refuses his plea. He tells Cain that his trouble is 
self-induced. Cain, in his rage, kills Abel, God's favourite (and, truth be known, Cain's 
idol). Cain is jealous, of course, of his successful brother. But he destroys Abel primarily 
to spite God. This is the truest version of what happens when people take their vengeance 
to the ultimate extreme. 

Panzram's response was (and this is what was so terrible) perfectly understandable. 
The details of his autobiography reveal that he was one of Tolstoy's strong and logically 
consistent people. He was a powerful, consistent, fearless actor. He had the courage of his 
convictions. How could someone like him be expected to forgive and forget, given what 
had happened to him? Truly terrible things happen to people. It's no wonder they're out 
for revenge. Under such conditions, vengeance seems a moral necessity. How can it be 
distinguished from the demand for justice? After the experience of terrible atrocity, isn't 
forgiveness just cowardice, or lack of willpower? Such questions torment me. But people 
emerge from terrible pasts to do good, and not evil, although such an accomplishment can 
seem superhuman. 

I have met people who managed to do it. I know a man, a great artist, who emerged 
from just such a "school" as the one described by Panzram-only this man was thrown 
into it as an innocent five-year-old, fresh from a long stretch in a hospital, where he had 
suffered measles, mumps and chicken pox, simultaneously. Incapable of speaking the 
language of the school, deliberately isolated from his family, abused, starved and 
otherwise tormented, he emerged an angry, broken young man. He hurt himself badly in 
the aftermath with drugs and alcohol and other forms of self-destructive behaviour. He 
detested everyone-God, himself and blind fate included. But he put an end to all of that. 
He stopped drinking. He stopped hating (although it still emerges in flashes). He 
revitalized the artistic culture of his Native tradition, and trained young men to continue 
in his footsteps. He produced a fifty-foot totem pole memorializing the events of his life, 


114 


and a canoe, forty feet long, from a single log, of a kind rarely if ever produced now. He 
brought his family together, and held a great potlatch, with sixteen hours of dancing and 
hundreds of people in attendance, to express his grief, and make peace with the past. He 
decided to be a good person, and then did the impossible things required to live that way. 

I had a client who did not have good parents. Her mother died when she was very 
young. Her grandmother, who raised her, was a harridan, bitter and over-concerned with 
appearances. She mistreated her granddaughter, punishing her for her virtues: creativity, 
sensitivity, intelligence-unable to resist acting out her resentment for an admittedly hard 
life on her granddaughter. She had a better relationship with her father, but he was an 
addict who died, badly, while she cared for him. My client had a son. She perpetuated 
none of this with him. He grew up truthful, and independent, and hard-working, and 
smart. Instead of widening the tear in the cultural fabric she inherited, and transmitting 
it, she sewed it up. She rejected the sins of her forefathers. Such things can be done. 

Distress, whether psychic, physical, or intellectual, need not at all produce nihilism (that is, the radical rejection 

of value, meaning and desirability). Such distress always permits a variety of interpretations. 

Nietzsche wrote those words. What he meant was this: people who experience evil 
may certainly desire to perpetuate it, to pay it forward. But it is also possible to learn 
good by experiencing evil. A bullied boy can mimic his tormentors. But he can also learn 
from his own abuse that it is wrong to push people around and make their lives 
miserable. Someone tormented by her mother can learn from her terrible experiences how 
important it is to be a good parent. Many, perhaps even most, of the adults who abuse 
children were abused themselves as children. However, the majority of people who were 
abused as children do not abuse their own children. This is a well-established fact, which 
can be demonstrated, simply, arithmetically, in this way: if one parent abused three 
children, and each of those children had three children, and so on, then there would be 
three abusers the first generation, nine the second, twenty-seven the third, eighty-one the 
fourth-and so on exponentially. After twenty generations, more than ten billion would 
have suffered childhood abuse: more people than currently inhabit the planet. But 
instead, abuse disappears across generations. People constrain its spread. That's a 
testament to the genuine dominance of good over evil in the human heart. 

The desire for vengeance, however justified, also bars the way to other productive 
thoughts. The American/English poet T. S. Eliot explained why, in his play, The Cocktail 
Party. One of his characters is not having a good time of it. She speaks of her profound 
unhappiness to a psychiatrist. She says she hopes that all her suffering is her own fault. 
The psychiatrist is taken aback. He asks why. She has thought long and hard about this, 
she says, and has come to the following conclusion: if it's her fault, she might be able to 
do something about it. If it's God's fault, however-if reality itself is flawed, hell-bent on 
ensuring her misery-then she is doomed. She couldn't change the structure of reality 
itself. But maybe she could change her own life. 

Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn had every reason to question the structure of existence when 
he was imprisoned in a Soviet labour camp, in the middle of the terrible twentieth 
century. He had served as a soldier on the ill-prepared Russian front lines in the face of a 
Nazi invasion. He had been arrested, beaten and thrown into prison by his own people. 
Then he was struck by cancer. He could have become resentful and bitter. His life had 
been rendered miserable by both Stalin and Hitler, two of the worst tyrants in history. He 
lived in brutal conditions. Vast stretches of his precious time were stolen from him and 
squandered. He witnessed the pointless and degrading suffering and death of his friends 
and acquaintances. Then he contracted an extremely serious disease. Solzhenitsyn had 
cause to curse God. Job himself barely had it as hard. 

But the great writer, the profound, spirited defender of truth, did not allow his mind to 
turn towards vengeance and destruction. He opened his eyes, instead. During his many 


115 


trials, Solzhenitsyn encountered people who comported themselves nobly, under horrific 
circumstances. He contemplated their behaviour deeply. Then he asked himself the most 
difficult of questions: had he personally contributed to the catastrophe of his life? If so, 
how? He remembered his unquestioning support of the Communist Party in his early 
years. He reconsidered his whole life. He had plenty of time in the camps. How had he 
missed the mark, in the past? How many times had he acted against his own conscience, 
engaging in actions that he knew to be wrong? How many times had he betrayed himself, 
and lied? Was there any way that the sins of his past could be rectified, atoned for, in the 
muddy hell of a Soviet gulag? 

Solzhenitsyn pored over the details of his life, with a fine-toothed comb. He asked 
himself a second question, and a third. Can I stop making such mistakes, now? Can I 
repair the damage done by my past failures, now? He learned to watch and to listen. He 
found people he admired; who were honest, despite everything. He took himself apart, 
piece by piece, let what was unnecessary and harmful die, and resurrected himself. Then 
he wrote The Gulag Archipelago, a history of the Soviet prison camp system. It's a 
forceful, terrible book, written with the overwhelming moral force of unvarnished truth. 
Its sheer outrage screamed unbearably across hundreds of pages. Banned (and for good 
reason) in the USSR, it was smuggled to the West in the 1970s, and burst upon the 
world. Solzhenitsyn's writing utterly and finally demolished the intellectual credibility of 
communism, as ideology or society. He took an axe to the trunk of the tree whose bitter 
fruits had nourished him so poorly-and whose planting he had witnessed and supported. 

One man's decision to change his life, instead of cursing fate, shook the whole 
pathological system of communist tyranny to its core. It crumbled entirely, not so many 
years later, and Solzhenitsyn's courage was not the least of the reasons why. He was not 
the only such person to perform such a miracle. Vaclav Havel, the persecuted writer who 
later, impossibly, became the president of Czechoslovakia, then of the new Czech 
Republic, comes to mind, as does Mahatma Gandhi. 

Things Fall Apart 

Whole peoples have adamantly refused to judge reality, to criticize Being, to blame God. 
It's interesting to consider the Old Testament Hebrews in this regard. Their travails 
followed a consistent pattern. The stories of Adam and Eve and Cain and Abel and Noah 
and the Tower of Babel are truly ancient. Their origins vanish into the mysteries of time. 
It's not until after the flood story in Genesis that something like history, as we 
understand it, truly starts. It starts with Abraham. Abraham's descendants become the 
Hebrew people of the Old Testament, also known as the Hebrew Bible. They enter a 
covenant with Yahweh-with God-and begin their recognizably historical adventures. 

Under the leadership of a great man, the Hebrews organize themselves into a society, 
and then an empire. As their fortunes rise, success breeds pride and arrogance. 
Corruption raises its ugly head. The increasingly hubristic state becomes obsessed with 
power, begins to forget its duty to the widows and orphans, and deviates from its age-old 
agreement with God. A prophet arises. He brazenly and publicly reviles the authoritarian 
king and faithless country for their failures before God-an act of blind courage-telling 
them of the terrible judgment to come. When his wise words are not completely ignored, 
they are heeded too late. God smites his wayward people, dooming them to abject defeat 
in battle and generations of subjugation. The Hebrews repent, at length, blaming their 
misfortune on their own failure to adhere to God's word. They insist to themselves that 
they could have done better. They rebuild their state, and the cycle begins again. 

This is life. We build structures to live in. We build families, and states, and countries. 
We abstract the principles upon which those structures are founded and formulate 


116 


systems of belief. At first we inhabit those structures and beliefs like Adam and Eve in 
Paradise. But success makes us complacent. We forget to pay attention. We take what we 
have for granted. We turn a blind eye. We fail to notice that things are changing, or that 
corruption is taking root. And everything falls apart. Is that the fault of reality-of God? 
Or do things fall apart because we have not paid sufficient attention? 

When the hurricane hit New Orleans, and the town sank under the waves, was that a 
natural disaster? The Dutch prepare their dikes for the worst storm in ten thousand years. 
Had New Orleans followed that example, no tragedy would have occurred. It's not that no 
one knew. The Flood Control Act of 1965 mandated improvements in the levee system 
that held back Lake Pontchartrain. The system was to be completed by 1978. Forty years 
later, only 60 percent of the work had been done. Willful blindness and corruption took 
the city down. 

A hurricane is an act of God. But failure to prepare, when the necessity for preparation 
is well known-that's sin. That's failure to hit the mark. And the wages of sin is death 
(Romans 6:23). The ancient Jews always blamed themselves when things fell apart. They 
acted as if God's goodness-the goodness of reality-was axiomatic, and took 
responsibility for their own failure. That's insanely responsible. But the alternative is to 
judge reality as insufficient, to criticize Being itself, and to sink into resentment and the 
desire for revenge. 

If you are suffering-well, that's the norm. People are limited and life is tragic. If your 
suffering is unbearable, however, and you are starting to become corrupted, here's 
something to think about. 

Clean Up Your Life 

Consider your circumstances. Start small. Have you taken full advantage of the 
opportunities offered to you? Are you working hard on your career, or even your job, or 
are you letting bitterness and resentment hold you back and drag you down? Have you 
made peace with your brother? Are you treating your spouse and your children with 
dignity and respect? Do you have habits that are destroying your health and well-being? 
Are you truly shouldering your responsibilities? Have you said what you need to say to 
your friends and family members? Are there things that you could do, that you know you 
could do, that would make things around you better? 

Have you cleaned up your life? 

If the answer is no, here's something to try: Start to stop doing what you know to be wrong. 
Start stopping today. Don't waste time questioning how you know that what you're doing 
is wrong, if you are certain that it is. Inopportune questioning can confuse, without 
enlightening, as well as deflecting you from action. You can know that something is 
wrong or right without knowing why. Your entire Being can tell you something that you 
can neither explain nor articulate. Every person is too complex to know themselves 
completely, and we all contain wisdom that we cannot comprehend. 

So, simply stop, when you apprehend, however dimly, that you should stop. Stop acting 
in that particular, despicable manner. Stop saying those things that make you weak and 
ashamed. Say only those things that make you strong. Do only those things that you 
could speak of with honour. 

You can use your own standards of judgment. You can rely on yourself for guidance. 
You don't have to adhere to some external, arbitrary code of behaviour (although you 
should not overlook the guidelines of your culture. Life is short, and you don't have time 
to figure everything out on your own. The wisdom of the past was hard-earned, and your 
dead ancestors may have something useful to tell you). 


117 



Don't blame capitalism, the radical left, or the iniquity of your enemies. Don't 
reorganize the state until you have ordered your own experience. Have some humility. If 
you cannot bring peace to your household, how dare you try to rule a city? Let your own 
soul guide you. Watch what happens over the days and weeks. When you are at work you 
will begin to say what you really think. You will start to tell your wife, or your husband, 
or your children, or your parents, what you really want and need. When you know that 
you have left something undone, you will act to correct the omission. Your head will start 
to clear up, as you stop filling it with lies. Your experience will improve, as you stop 
distorting it with inauthentic actions. You will then begin to discover new, more subtle 
things that you are doing wrong. Stop doing those, too. After some months and years of 
diligent effort, your life will become simpler and less complicated. Your judgment will 
improve. You will untangle your past. You will become stronger and less bitter. You will 
move more confidently into the future. You will stop making your life unnecessarily 
difficult. You will then be left with the inevitable bare tragedies of life, but they will no 
longer be compounded with bitterness and deceit. 

Perhaps you will discover that your now less-corrupted soul, much stronger than it 
might otherwise have been, is now able to bear those remaining, necessary, minimal, 
inescapable tragedies. Perhaps you will even learn to encounter them so that they stay 
tragic-merely tragic-instead of degenerating into outright hellishness. Maybe your 
anxiety, and hopelessness, and resentment, and anger-however murderous, initially- 
will recede. Perhaps your uncorrupted soul will then see its existence as a genuine good, 
as something to celebrate, even in the face of your own vulnerability. Perhaps you will 
become an ever-more-powerful force for peace and whatever is good. 

Perhaps you will then see that if all people did this, in their own lives, the world might 
stop being an evil place. After that, with continued effort, perhaps it could even stop 
being a tragic place. Who knows what existence might be like if we all decided to strive 
for the best? Who knows what eternal heavens might be established by our spirits, 
purified by truth, aiming skyward, right here on the fallen Earth? 

Set your house in perfect order before you criticize the world. 


118 




119 






















a 


120 


RULE 7 

PURSUE WHAT IS MEANINGFUL (NOT WHAT IS EXPEDIENT) 


GET WHILE THE GETTING'S GOOD 

Life is suffering. That's clear. There is no more basic, irrefutable truth. It's basically what 
God tells Adam and Eve, immediately before he kicks them out of Paradise. 

Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth 
children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. 

And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, 
of which I commanded thee, saying. Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt 
thou eat of it all the days of thy life; 

Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; 

By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the ground, since from it you were taken; 
for dust you are and to dust you will return." (Genesis 3:16-19. KJV) 

What in the world should be done about that? 

The simplest, most obvious, and most direct answer? Pursue pleasure. Follow your 
impulses. Live for the moment. Do what's expedient. Lie, cheat, steal, deceive, 
manipulate-but don't get caught. In an ultimately meaningless universe, what possible 
difference could it make? And this is by no means a new idea. The fact of life's tragedy 
and the suffering that is part of it has been used to justify the pursuit of immediate selfish 
gratification for a very long time. 

Short and sorrowful is our life, and there is no remedy when a man comes to his end, and no one has been 
known to return from Hades. 

Because we were born by mere chance, and hereafter we shall be as though we had never been; because the 
breath in our nostrils is smoke, and reason is a spark kindled by the beating of our hearts. 

When it is extinguished, the body will turn to ashes, and the spirit will dissolve like empty air. Our name will 
be forgotten in time and no one will remember our works; our life will pass away like the traces of a cloud, and 
be scattered like mist that is chased by the rays of the sun and overcome by its heat. 

For our allotted time is the passing of a shadow, and there is no return from our death, because it is sealed up 
and no one turns back. 

Come, therefore, let us enjoy the good things that exist, and make use of the creation to the full as in youth. 

Let us take our fill of costly wine and perfumes, and let no flower of spring pass by us. 

Let us crown ourselves with rosebuds before they wither. 

Let none of us fail to share in our revelry, everywhere let us leave signs of enjoyment, because this is our 
portion, and this our lot. 

Let us oppress the righteous poor man; let us not spare the widow nor regard the gray hairs of the aged. 

But let our might be our law of right, for what is weak proves itself to be useless. (Wisdom 2:1-11, RSV). 

The pleasure of expediency may be fleeting, but it's pleasure, nonetheless, and that's 
something to stack up against the terror and pain of existence. Every man for himself, and 
the devil take the hindmost, as the old proverb has it. Why not simply take everything 
you can get, whenever the opportunity arises? Why not determine to live in that manner? 

Or is there an alternative, more powerful and more compelling? 

Our ancestors worked out very sophisticated answers to such questions, but we still 
don't understand them very well. This is because they are in large part still implicit- 
manifest primarily in ritual and myth and, as of yet, incompletely articulated. We act 
them out and represent them in stories, but we're not yet wise enough to formulate them 
explicitly. We're still chimps in a troupe, or wolves in a pack. We know how to behave. 
We know who's who, and why. We've learned that through experience. Our knowledge 
has been shaped by our interaction with others. We've established predictable routines 
and patterns of behavior-but we don't really understand them, or know where they 
originated. They've evolved over great expanses of time. No one was formulating them 
explicitly (at least not in the dimmest reaches of the past), even though we've been telling 


121 



each other how to act forever. One day, however, not so long ago, we woke up. We were 
already doing, but we started noticing what we were doing. We started using our bodies as 
devices to represent their own actions. We started imitating and dramatizing. We 
invented ritual. We started acting out our own experiences. Then we started to tell 
stories. We coded our observations of our own drama in these stories. In this manner, the 
information that was first only embedded in our behaviour became represented in our 
stories. But we didn't and still don't understand what it all means. 

The Biblical narrative of Paradise and the Fall is one such story, fabricated by our 
collective imagination, working over the centuries. It provides a profound account of the 
nature of Being, and points the way to a mode of conceptualization and action well- 
matched to that nature. In the Garden of Eden, prior to the dawn of self-consciousness- 
so goes the story-human beings were sinless. Our primordial parents, Adam and Eve, 
walked with God. Then, tempted by the snake, the first couple ate from the tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil, discovered Death and vulnerability, and turned away from 
God. Mankind was exiled from Paradise, and began its effortful mortal existence. The idea 
of sacrifice enters soon afterward, beginning with the account of Cain and Abel, and 
developing through the Abrahamic adventures and the Exodus: After much 
contemplation, struggling humanity learns that God's favour could be gained, and his 
wrath averted, through proper sacrifice-and, also, that bloody murder might be 
motivated among those unwilling or unable to succeed in this manner. 

The Delay of Gratification 

When engaging in sacrifice, our forefathers began to act out what would be considered a 
proposition, if it were stated in words: that something better might be attained in the future by 
giving up something of value in the present. Recall, if you will, that the necessity for work is 
one of the curses placed by God upon Adam and his descendants in consequence of 
Original Sin. Adam's waking to the fundamental constraints of his Being-his 
vulnerability, his eventual death-is equivalent to his discovery of the future. The future: 
that's where you go to die (hopefully, not too soon). Your demise might be staved off 
through work; through the sacrifice of the now to gain benefit later. It is for this reason- 
among others, no doubt-that the concept of sacrifice is introduced in the Biblical chapter 
immediately following the drama of the Fall. There is little difference between sacrifice 
and work. They are also both uniquely human. Sometimes, animals act as if they are 
working, but they are really only following the dictates of their nature. Beavers build 
dams. They do so because they are beavers, and beavers build dams. They don't think, 
"Yeah, but I'd rather be on a beach in Mexico with my girlfriend," while they're doing it. 

Prosaically, such sacrifice-work-is delay of gratification, but that's a very mundane 
phrase to describe something of such profound significance. The discovery that 
gratification could be delayed was simultaneously the discovery of time and, with it, 
causality (at least the causal force of voluntary human action). Long ago, in the dim mists 
of time, we began to realize that reality was structured as if it could be bargained with. We 
learned that behaving properly now, in the present-regulating our impulses, considering 
the plight of others-could bring rewards in the future, in a time and place that did not 
yet exist. We began to inhibit, control and organize our immediate impulses, so that we 
could stop interfering with other people and our future selves. Doing so was 
indistinguishable from organizing society: the discovery of the causal relationship 
between our efforts today and the quality of tomorrow motivated the social contract-the 
organization that enables today's work to be stored, reliably (mostly in the form of 
promises from others). 


122 



Understanding is often acted out before it can be articulated (just as a child acts out 
what it means to be "mother" or "father" before being able to give a spoken account of 
what those roles mean). The act of making a ritual sacrifice to God was an early and 
sophisticated enactment of the idea of the usefulness of delay. There is a long conceptual 
journey between merely feasting hungrily and learning to set aside some extra meat, 
smoked by the fire, for the end of the day, or for someone who isn't present. It takes a 
long time to learn to keep anything later for yourself, or to share it with someone else 
(and those are very much the same thing as, in the former case, you are sharing with your 
future self). It is much easier and far more likely to selfishly and immediately wolf down 
everything in sight. There are similar long journeys between every leap in sophistication 
with regard to delay and its conceptualization: short-term sharing, storing away for the 
future, representation of that storage in the form of records and, later, in the form of 
currency-and, ultimately, the saving of money in a bank or other social institution. Some 
conceptualizations had to serve as intermediaries, or the full range of our practices and 
ideas surrounding sacrifice and work and their representation could have never emerged. 

Our ancestors acted out a drama, a fiction: they personified the force that governs fate 
as a spirit that can be bargained with, traded with, as if it were another human being. And 
the amazing thing is that it worked. This was in part because the future is largely 
composed of other human beings-often precisely those who have watched and evaluated 
and appraised the tiniest details of your past behavior. It's not very far from that to God, 
sitting above on high, tracking your every move and writing it down for further reference 
in a big book. Here's a productive symbolic idea: the future is a judgmental father. That's a 
good start. But two additional, archetypal, foundational questions arose, because of the 
discovery of sacrifice, of work. Both have to do with the ultimate extension of the logic of 
work-which is sacrifice now, to gain later. 

First question. What must be sacrificed? Small sacrifices may be sufficient to solve 
small, singular problems. But it is possible that larger, more comprehensive sacrifices 
might solve an array of large and complex problems, all at the same time. That's harder, 
but it might be better. Adapting to the necessary discipline of medical school will, for 
example, fatally interfere with the licentious lifestyle of a hardcore undergraduate party 
animal. Giving that up is a sacrifice. But a physician can-to paraphrase George W.- 
really put food on his family. That's a lot of trouble dispensed with, over a very long 
period of time. So, sacrifices are necessary, to improve the future, and larger sacrifices can 
be better. 

Second question (set of related questions, really): We've already established the basic 
principle- sacrifice will improve the future. But a principle, once established, has to be 
fleshed out. Its full extension or significance has to be understood. What is implied by the 
idea that sacrifice will improve the future, in the most extreme and final of cases? Where 
does that basic principle find its limits? We must ask, to begin, "What would be the 
largest, most effective-most pleasing-of all possible sacrifices?" and then "How good 
might the best possible future be, if the most effective sacrifice could be made?" 

The biblical story of Cain and Abel, Adam and Eve's sons, immediately follows the 
story of the expulsion from Paradise, as mentioned previously. Cain and Abel are really 
the first humans, since their parents were made directly by God, and not born in the 
standard manner. Cain and Abel live in history, not in Eden. They must work. They must 
make sacrifices, to please God, and they do so, with altar and proper ritual. But things get 
complicated. Abel's offerings please God, but Cain's do not. Abel is rewarded, many times 
over, but Cain is not. It's not precisely clear why (although the text strongly hints that 
Cain's heart is just not in it). Maybe the quality of what Cain put forward was low. Maybe 
his spirit was begrudging. Or maybe God was vexed, for some secret reasons of His own. 
And all of this is realistic, including the text's vagueness of explanation. Not all sacrifices 


123 


are of equal quality. Furthermore, it often appears that sacrifices of apparently high 
quality are not rewarded with a better future-and it's not clear why. Why isn't God 
happy? What would have to change to make Him so? Those are difficult questions-and 
everyone asks them, all the time, even if they don't notice. 

Asking such questions is indistinguishable from thinking. 

The realization that pleasure could be usefully forestalled dawned on us with great 
difficulty. It runs absolutely contrary to our ancient, fundamental animal instincts, which 
demand immediate satisfaction (particularly under conditions of deprivation, which are 
both inevitable and commonplace). And, to complicate the matter, such delay only 
becomes useful when civilization has stabilized itself enough to guarantee the existence 
of the delayed reward, in the future. If everything you save will be destroyed or, worse, 
stolen, there is no point in saving. It is for this reason that a wolf will down twenty 
pounds of raw meat in a single meal. He isn't thinking, "Man, I hate it when I binge. I 
should save some of this for next week." So how was it that those two impossible and 
necessarily simultaneous accomplishments (delay and the stabilization of society into the 
future) could possibly have manifested themselves? 

Here is a developmental progression, from animal to human. It's wrong, no doubt, in 
the details. But it's sufficiently correct, for our purposes, in theme: First, there is excess 
food. Large carcasses, mammoths or other massive herbivores, might provide that. (We 
ate a lot of mammoths. Maybe all of them.) After a kill, with a large animal, there is some 
left for later. That's accidental, at first-but, eventually, the utility of "for later" starts to 
be appreciated. Some provisional notion of sacrifice develops at the same time: "If I leave 
some, even if I want it now, I won't have to be hungry later." That provisional notion 
develops, to the next level ("If I leave some for later, I won't have to go hungry, and 
neither will those I care for") and then to the next ("I can't possibly eat all of this 
mammoth, but I can't store the rest for too long, either. Maybe I should feed some to 
other people. Maybe they'll remember, and feed me some of their mammoth, when they 
have some and I have none. Then I'll get some mammoth now, and some mammoth later. 
That's a good deal. And maybe those I'm sharing with will come to trust me, more 
generally. Maybe then we could trade forever"). In such a manner, "mammoth" becomes 
"future mammoth," and "future mammoth" becomes "personal reputation." That's the 
emergence of the social contract. 

To share does not mean to give away something you value, and get nothing back. That 
is instead only what every child who refuses to share fears it means. To share means, 
properly, to initiate the process of trade. A child who can't share-who can't trade-can't 
have any friends, because having friends is a form of trade. Benjamin Franklin once 
suggested that a newcomer to a neighbourhood ask a new neighbour to do him or her a 
favour, citing an old maxim: He that has once done you a kindness will be more ready to do you 
another than he whom you yourself have obliged. In Franklin's opinion, asking someone for 
something (not too extreme, obviously) was the most useful and immediate invitation to 
social interaction. Such asking on the part of the newcomer provided the neighbour with 
an opportunity to show him- or herself as a good person, at first encounter. It also meant 
that the latter could now ask the former for a favour, in return, because of the debt 
incurred, increasingly their mutual familiarity and trust. In that manner both parties 
could overcome their natural hesitancy and mutual fear of the stranger. 

It is better to have something than nothing. It's better yet to share generously the 
something you have. It's even better than that, however, to become widely known for 
generous sharing. That's something that lasts. That's something that's reliable. And, at 
this point of abstraction, we can observe how the groundwork for the conceptions reliable, 
honest and generous has been laid. The basis for an articulated morality has been put in 
place. The productive, truthful sharer is the prototype for the good citizen, and the good 


124 


man. We can see in this manner how from the simple notion that "leftovers are a good 
idea" the highest moral principles might emerge. 

It's as if something like the following happened as humanity developed. First were the 
endless tens or hundreds of thousands of years prior to the emergence of written history 
and drama. During this time, the twin practices of delay and exchange begin to emerge, 
slowly and painfully. Then they become represented, in metaphorical abstraction, as 
rituals and tales of sacrifice, told in a manner such as this: "It's as if there is a powerful 
Figure in the Sky, who sees all, and is judging you. Giving up something you value seems 
to make Him happy-and you want to make Him happy, because all Hell breaks loose if 
you don't. So, practise sacrificing, and sharing, until you become expert at it, and things 
will go well for you." No one said any of this, at least not so plainly and directly. But it 
was implicit in the practice and then in the stories. 

Action came first (as it had to, as the animals we once were could act but could not 
think). Implicit, unrecognized value came first (as the actions that preceded thought embodied 
value, but did not make that value explicit). People watched the successful succeed and 
the unsuccessful fail for thousands and thousands of years. We thought it over, and drew 
a conclusion: The successful among us delay gratification. The successful among us bargain with the 
future. A great idea begins to emerge, taking ever-more-clearly-articulated form, in ever 
more-clearly-articulated stories: What's the difference between the successful and the 
unsuccessful? The successful sacrifice. Things get better, as the successful practise their 
sacrifices. The questions become increasingly precise and, simultaneously, broader: What 
is the greatest possible sacrifice? For the greatest possible good? And the answers become 
increasingly deeper and profound. 

The God of Western tradition, like so many gods, requires sacrifice. We have already 
examined why. But sometimes He goes even further. He demands not only sacrifice, but 
the sacrifice of precisely what is loved best. This is most starkly portrayed (and most 
confusingly evident) in the story of Abraham and Isaac. Abraham, beloved of God, long 
wanted a son-and God promised him exactly that, after many delays, and under the 
apparently impossible conditions of old age and a long-barren wife. But not so long 
afterward, when the miraculously-borne Isaac is still a child, God turns around and in 
unreasonable and apparently barbaric fashion demands that His faithful servant offer his 
son as a sacrifice. The story ends happily: God sends an angel to stay Abraham's obedient 
hand and accepts a ram in Isaac's stead. That's a good thing, but it doesn't really address 
the issue at hand: Why is God's going further necessary? Why does He-why does life- 
impose such demands? 

We'll start our analysis with a truism, stark, self-evident and understated: Sometimes 
things do not go well. That seems to have much to do with the terrible nature of the world, 
with its plagues and famines and tyrannies and betrayals. But here's the rub: sometimes, 
when things are not going well, it's not the world that's the cause. The cause is instead that which is 
currently most valued, subjectively and personally. Why? Because the world is revealed, to an 
indeterminate degree, through the template of your values (much more on this in Rule 
10). If the world you are seeing is not the world you want, therefore, it's time to examine 
your values. It's time to rid yourself of your current presuppositions. It's time to let go. It 
might even be time to sacrifice what you love best, so that you can become who you 
might become, instead of staying who you are. 

There's an old and possibly apocryphal story about how to catch a monkey that 
illustrates this set of ideas very well. First, you must find a large, narrow-necked jar, just 
barely wide enough in diameter at the top for a monkey to put its hand inside. Then you 
must fill the jar part way with rocks, so it is too heavy for a monkey to carry. Then you 
must to scatter some treats, attractive to monkeys, near the jar, to attract one, and put 
some more inside the jar. A monkey will come along, reach into the narrow opening, and 


125 


grab while the grabbing's good. But now he won't be able to extract his fist, now full of 
treats, from the too-narrow opening of the jar. Not without unclenching his hand. Not 
without relinquishing what he already has. And that's just what he won't do. The 
monkey-catcher can just walk over to the jar and pick up the monkey. The animal will not 
sacrifice the part to preserve the whole. 

Something valuable, given up, ensures future prosperity. Something valuable, 
sacrificed, pleases the Lord. What is most valuable, and best sacrificed?-or, what is at 
least emblematic of that? A choice cut of meat. The best animal in a flock. A most valued 
possession. What's above even that? Something intensely personal and painful to give up. 
That's symbolized, perhaps, in God's insistence on circumcision as part of Abraham's 
sacrificial routine, where the part is offered, symbolically, to redeem the whole. What's 
beyond that? What pertains more closely to the whole person, rather than the part? What 
constitutes the ultimate sacrifice-for the gain of the ultimate prize? 

It's a close race between child and self. The sacrifice of the mother, offering her child to 
the world, is exemplified profoundly by Michelangelo's great sculpture, the Pieta, 
illustrated at the beginning of this chapter. Michelangelo crafted Mary contemplating her 
Son, crucified and ruined. It's her fault. It was through her that He entered the world and 
its great drama of Being. Is it right to bring a baby into this terrible world? Every woman asks 
herself that question. Some say no, and they have their reasons. Mary answers yes, 
voluntarily, knowing full well what's to come-as do all mothers, if they allow themselves 
to see. It's an act of supreme courage, when undertaken voluntarily. 

In turn, Mary's son, Christ, offers Himself to God and the world, to betrayal, torture 
and death-to the very point of despair on the cross, where he cries out those terrible 
words: my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? (Matthew 27:46). That is the archetypal 
story of the man who gives his all for the sake of the better-who offers up his life for the 
advancement of Being-who allows God's will to become manifest fully within the 
confines of a single, mortal life. That is the model for the honourable man. In Christ's 
case, however-as He sacrifices Himself-God, His Father, is simultaneously sacrificing 
His son. It is for this reason that the Christian sacrificial drama of Son and Self is 
archetypal. It's a story at the limit, where nothing more extreme-nothing greater-can 
be imagined. That's the very definition of "archetypal." That's the core of what 
constitutes "religious." 

Pain and suffering define the world. Of that, there can be no doubt. Sacrifice can hold 
pain and suffering in abeyance, to a greater or lesser degree-and greater sacrifices can do 
that more effectively than lesser. Of that, there can be no doubt. Everyone holds this 
knowledge in their soul. Thus, the person who wishes to alleviate suffering-who wishes 
to rectify the flaws in Being; who wants to bring about the best of all possible futures; 
who wants to create Heaven on Earth-will make the greatest of sacrifices, of self and 
child, of everything that is loved, to live a life aimed at the Good. He will forego 
expediency. He will pursue the path of ultimate meaning. And he will in that manner 
bring salvation to the ever-desperate world. 

But is such a thing even possible? Is this simply not asking too much of the individual? 
It's all well and good for Christ, it might be objected-but He was the veritable Son of 
God. But we do have other examples, some much less mythologized and archetypal. 
Consider, for example, the case of Socrates, the ancient Greek philosopher. After a 
lifetime of seeking the truth and educating his countrymen, Socrates faced a trial for 
crimes against the city-state of Athens, his hometown. His accusers provided him with 
plenty of opportunity to simply leave, and avoid the trouble. But the great sage had 
already considered and rejected this course of action. His companion Hermogenes 
observed him at this time discussing "any and every subject" 1 other than his trial, and 
asked him why he appeared so unconcerned. Socrates first answered that he had been 


126 


preparing his whole life to defend himself, but then said something more mysterious 
and significant: When he attempted specifically to consider strategies that would produce 
acquittal "by fair means or foul" -or even when merely considering his potential 
actions at the trial -he found himself interrupted by his divine sign: his internal spirit, 
voice or daemon. Socrates discussed this voice at the trial itself. He said that one of the 
factors distinguishing him from other men was his absolute willingness to listen to its 
warnings-to stop speaking and cease acting when it objected. The Gods themselves had 
deemed him wise above other men, not least for this reason, according to the Delphic 
Oracle herself, held to be a reliable judge of such things." 

Because his ever-reliable internal voice objected to fleeing (or even to defending 
himself) Socrates radically altered his view of the significance of his trial. He began to 
consider that it might be a blessing, rather than a curse. He told Hermogenes of his 
realization that the spirit to whom he had always listened might be offering him a way 
out of life, in a manner "easiest but also the least irksome to one's friends," with 
"sound body and a spirit capable of showing kindliness"- 1 and absent the "throes of 
illness" and vexations of extreme old age. Socrates' decision to accept his fate allowed 
him to put away mortal terror in the face of death itself, prior to and during the trial, after 
the sentence was handed down, and even later, during his execution. He saw that 
his life had been so rich and full that he could let it go, gracefully. He was given the 
opportunity to put his affairs in order. He saw that he could escape the terrible slow 
degeneration of the advancing years. He came to understand all that was happening to 
him as a gift from the gods. He was not therefore required to defend himself against his 
accusers-at least not with the aim of pronouncing his innocence, and escaping his fate. 
Instead, he turned the tables, addressing his judges in a manner that makes the reader 
understand precisely why the town council wanted this man dead. Then he took his 
poison, like a man. 

Socrates rejected expediency, and the necessity for manipulation that accompanied it. 
He chose instead, under the direst of conditions, to maintain his pursuit of the 
meaningful and the true. Twenty-five hundred years later, we remember his decision and 
take comfort from it. What can we learn from this? If you cease to utter falsehoods and 
live according to the dictates of your conscience, you can maintain your nobility, even 
when facing the ultimate threat; if you abide, truthfully and courageously, by the highest 
of ideals, you will be provided with more security and strength than will be offered by any 
short-sighted concentration on your own safety; if you live properly, fully, you can 
discover meaning so profound that it protects you even from the fear of death. 

Could all that possibly be true? 

Death, Toil and Evil 

The tragedy of self-conscious Being produces suffering, inevitable suffering. That 
suffering in turn motivates the desire for selfish, immediate gratification-for expediency. 
But sacrifice-and work-serves far more effectively than short-term impulsive pleasure 
at keeping suffering at bay. However, tragedy itself (conceived of as the arbitrary 
harshness of society and nature, set against the vulnerability of the individual) is not the 
only-and perhaps not even the primary-source of suffering. There is also the problem 
of evil to consider. The world is set hard against us, of a certainty, but man's inhumanity 
to man is something even worse. Thus, the problem of sacrifice is compounded in its 
complexity: it is not only privation and mortal limitation that must be addressed by work 
-by the willingness to offer, and to give up. It is the problem of evil as well. 


127 


Consider, once again, the story of Adam and Eve. Life becomes very hard for their 
children (that's us) after the fall and awakening of our archetypal parents. First is the 
terrible fate awaiting us in the post-Paradisal world-in the world of history. Not the least 
of this is what Goethe called "our creative, endless toil."- Humans work, as we have 
seen. We work because we have awakened to the truth of our own vulnerability, our 
subjugation to disease and death, and wish to protect ourselves for as long as possible. 
Once we can see the future, we must prepare for it, or live in denial and terror. We 
therefore sacrifice the pleasures of today for the sake of a better tomorrow. But the 
realization of mortality and the necessity of work is not the only revelation to Adam and 
Eve when they eat the forbidden Fruit, wake up, and open their eyes. They were also 
granted (or cursed by) the knowledge of Good and Evil. 

It took me decades to understand what that means (to understand even part of what 
that means). It's this: once you become consciously aware that you, yourself, are 
vulnerable, you understand the nature of human vulnerability, in general. You understand 
what it's like to be fearful, and angry, and resentful, and bitter. You understand what pain 
means. And once you truly understand such feelings in yourself, and how they're 
produced, you understand how to produce them in others. It is in this manner that the self- 
conscious beings that we are become voluntarily and exquisitely capable of tormenting 
others (and ourselves, of course-but it's the others we are concerned about right now). 
We see the consequences of this new knowledge manifest themselves when we meet Cain 
and Abel, the sons of Adam and Eve. 

By the time of their appearance, mankind has learned to make sacrifices to God. On 
altars of stone, designed for that purpose, a communal ritual is performed: the 
immolation of something valuable, a choice animal or portion thereof, and its 
transformation through fire to the smoke (to the spirit) that rises to Heaven above. In 
this manner, the idea of delay is dramatized, so that the future might improve. Abel's 
sacrifices are accepted by God, and he flourishes. Cain's, however, are rejected. He 
becomes jealous and bitter-and it's no wonder. If someone fails and is rejected because 
he refused to make any sacrifices at all-well, that's at least understandable. He may still 
feel resentful and vengeful, but knows in his heart that he is personally to blame. That 
knowledge generally places a limit on his outrage. It's much worse, however, if he had 
actually foregone the pleasures of the moment-if he had strived and toiled and things 
still didn't work out-if he was rejected, despite his efforts. Then he's lost the present and 
the future. Then his work-his sacrifice-has been pointless. Under such conditions, the 
world darkens, and the soul rebels. 

Cain is outraged by his rejection. He confronts God, accuses Him, and curses His 
creation. That proves to be a very poor decision. God responds, in no uncertain terms, 
that the fault is all with Cain-and worse: that Cain has knowingly and creatively dallied 
with sin, and reaped the consequences. This is not at all what Cain wanted to hear. It's 
by no means an apology on God's part. Instead, it's insult, added to injury. Cain, 
embittered to the core by God's response, plots revenge. He defies the creator, 
audaciously. It's daring. Cain knows how to hurt. He's self-conscious, after all-and has 
become even more so, in his suffering and shame. So, he murders Abel in cold blood. He 
kills his brother, his own ideal (as Abel is everything Cain wishes to be). He commits this 
most terrible of crimes to spite himself, all of mankind, and God Himself, all at once. He 
does it to wreak havoc and gain his vengeance. He does it to register his fundamental 
opposition to existence-to protest the intolerable vagaries of Being itself. And Cain's 
children-the offspring, as it were of both his body and his decision-are worse. In his 
existential fury, Cain kills once. Lamech, his descendant, goes much further. "I have slain 
a man to my wounding," says Lamech," and a young man to my hurt. If Cain shall be 
avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold" (Genesis 4:23-24). Tubulcain, an 


128 


instructor of "every artificer in brass and iron" (Genesis 4:22), is by tradition seven 
generations from Cain-and the first creator of weapons of war. And next, in the Genesis 
stories, comes the flood. The juxtaposition is by no means accidental. 

Evil enters the world with self-consciousness. The toil with which God curses Adam-that's 
bad enough. The trouble in childbirth with which Eve is burdened and her consequent 
dependence on her husband are no trivial matters, either. They are indicative of the 
implicit and oft-agonizing tragedies of insufficiency, privation, brute necessity and 
subjugation to illness and death that simultaneously define and plague existence. Their 
mere factual reality is sometimes sufficient to turn even a courageous person against life. 
It has been my experience, however, that human beings are strong enough to tolerate the 
implicit tragedies of Being without faltering-without breaking or, worse, breaking bad. I 
have seen evidence of this repeatedly in my private life, in my work as a professor, and in 
my role as a clinical practitioner. Earthquakes, floods, poverty, cancer-we're tough 
enough to take on all of that. But human evil adds a whole new dimension of misery to 
the world. It is for this reason that the rise of self-consciousness and its attendant 
realization of mortality and knowledge of Good and Evil is presented in the early chapters 
of Genesis (and in the vast tradition that surrounds them) as a cataclysm of cosmic 
magnitude. 

Conscious human malevolence can break the spirit even tragedy could not shake. I 
remember discovering (with her) that one of my clients had been shocked into years of 
serious post-traumatic stress disorder-daily physical shaking and terror, and chronic 
nightly insomnia-by the mere expression on her enraged, drunken boyfriend's face. His 
"fallen countenance" (Genesis 4:5) indicated his clear and conscious desire to do her 
harm. She was more naive than she should have been, and that predisposed her to the 
trauma, but that's not the point: the voluntary evil we do one another can be profoundly 
and permanently damaging, even to the strong. And what is it, precisely, that motivates 
such evil? 

It doesn't make itself manifest merely in consequence of the hard lot of life. It doesn't 
even emerge, simply, because of failure itself, or because of the disappointment and 
bitterness that failure often and understandably engenders. But the hard lot of life, 
magnified by the consequence of continually rejected sacrifices (however poorly 
conceptualized; however half-heartedly executed)? That will bend and twist people into 
the truly monstrous forms who then begin, consciously, to work evil; who then begin to 
generate for themselves and others little besides pain and suffering (and who do it for the 
sake of that pain and suffering). In that manner, a truly vicious circle takes hold: 
begrudging sacrifice, half-heartedly undertaken; rejection of that sacrifice by God or by 
reality (take your pick); angry resentment, generated by that rejection; descent into 
bitterness and the desire for revenge; sacrifice undertaken even more begrudgingly, or 
refused altogether. And it's Hell itself that serves as the destination place of that 
downward spiral. 

Life is indeed "nasty, brutish and short," as the English philosopher Thomas Hobbes so 
memorably remarked. But man's capacity for evil makes it worse. This means that the 
central problem of life-the dealing with its brute facts-is not merely what and how to 
sacrifice to diminish suffering, but what and how to sacrifice to diminish suffering and evil 
-the conscious and voluntary and vengeful source of the worst suffering. The story of Cain and 
Abel is one manifestation of the archetypal tale of the hostile brothers, hero and 
adversary: the two elements of the individual human psyche, one aimed up, at the Good, 
and the other, down, at Hell itself. Abel is a hero, true: but a hero who is ultimately 
defeated by Cain. Abel could please God-a non-trivial and unlikely accomplishment-but 
he could not overcome human evil. For this reason, Abel is archetypally incomplete. 
Perhaps he was naive, although a vengeful brother can be inconceivably treacherous and 


129 



subtil, like the snake in Genesis 3:1. But excuses-even reasons-even understandable 
reasons-don't matter; not in the final analysis. The problem of evil remained unsolved 
even by the divinely acceptable sacrifices of Abel. It took thousands of additional years for 
humanity to come up with anything else resembling a solution. The same issue emerges 
again, in its culminating form, the story of Christ and his temptation by Satan. But this 
time it's expressed more comprehensively-and the hero wins. 

Evil, Confronted 

Jesus was led into the wilderness, according to the story, "to be tempted by the Devil" 
(Matthew 4:1), prior to his crucifixion. This is the story of Cain, restated abstractly. Cain 
is neither content nor happy, as we have seen. He's working hard, or so he thinks, but 
God is not pleased. Meanwhile, Abel is, by all appearances, dancing his way through life. 
His crops flourish. Women love him. Worst of all, he's a genuinely good man. Everyone 
knows it. He deserves his good fortune. All the more reason to envy and hate him. Things 
do not progress well for Cain, by contrast, and he broods on his misfortune, like a vulture 
on an egg. He strives, in his misery, to give birth to something hellish and, in doing so, 
enters the desert wilderness of his own mind. He obsesses over his ill fortune; his 
betrayal by God. He nourishes his resentment. He indulges in ever more elaborate 
fantasies of revenge. And as he does so, his arrogance grows to Luciferian proportions. 
"I'm ill-used and oppressed," he thinks. "This is a stupid bloody planet. As far as I'm 
concerned, it can go to Hell." And with that, Cain encounters Satan in the wilderness, for 
all intents and purposes, and falls prey to his temptations. And he does what he can to 
make things as bad as possible, motivated by (in John Milton's imperishable words): 

So deep a malice, to confound the Race 
Of Mankind in one Root, and Earth with Hell 
to mingle and involve-done all to spite 
the Great Creator..  

Cain turns to Evil to obtain what Good denied him, and he does it voluntarily, self- 
consciously and with malice aforethought. 

Christ takes a different path. His sojourn in the desert is the dark night of the soul-a 
deeply human and universal human experience. It's the journey to that place each of us 
goes when things fall apart, friends and family are distant, hopelessness and despair reign, 
and black nihilism beckons. And, let us suggest, in testament to the exactitude of the 
story: forty days and nights starving alone in the wilderness might take you exactly to that 
place. It is in such a manner that the objective and subjective worlds come crashing, 
synchronistically, together. Forty days is a deeply symbolic period of time, echoing the 
forty years the Israelites spent wandering in the desert after escaping the tyranny of 
Pharaoh and Egypt. Forty days is a long time in the underworld of dark assumptions, 
confusion and fear-long enough to journey to the very center, which is Hell itself. A 
journey there to see the sights can be undertaken by anyone-anyone, that is, who is 
willing to take the evil of self and Man with sufficient seriousness. A bit of familiarity 
with history can help. A sojourn through the totalitarian horrors of the twentieth century, 
with its concentration camps, forced labor and murderous ideological pathologies is as 
good a place as any to start-that, and some consideration of the fact that worst of the 
concentration camp guards were human, all-too-human, too. That's all part of making the 
desert story real again; part of updating it, for the modern mind. 

"After Auschwitz," said Theodor Adorno, student of authoritarianism, "there should be 
no poetry." He was wrong. But the poetry should be about Auschwitz. In the grim wake 
of the last ten decades of the previous millennium, the terrible destructiveness of man has 
become a problem whose seriousness self-evidently dwarfs even the problem of 
unredeemed suffering. And neither one of those problems is going to be solved in the 


130 


absence of a solution to the other. This is where the idea of Christ's taking on the sins of 
mankind as if they were His own becomes key, opening the door to deep understanding of 
the desert encounter with the devil himself. "Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum puto," 
said the Roman playwright Terence: nothing human is alien to me. 

"No tree can grow to Heaven," adds the ever-terrifying Carl Gustav Jung, psychoanalyst 
extraordinaire, "unless its roots reach down to Hell."! Such a statement should give 
everyone who encounters it pause. There was no possibility for movement upward, in 
that great psychiatrist's deeply considered opinion, without a corresponding move down. 
It is for this reason that enlightenment is so rare. Who is willing to do that? Do you really 
want to meet who's in charge, at the very bottom of the most wicked thoughts? What did 
Eric Harris, mass murderer of the Columbine high school, write so incomprehensibly the 
very day prior to massacring his classmates? It's interesting, when I'm in my human form, 
knowing I'm going to die. Everything has a touch of triviality to it. Who would dare explain 
such a missive?-or, worse, explain it away? 

In the desert, Christ encounters Satan (see Luke 4:1-13 and Matthew 4:1-11). This 
story has a clear psychological meaning-a metaphorical meaning-in addition to 
whatever else material and metaphysical alike it might signify. It means that Christ is 
forever He who determines to take personal responsibility for the full depth of human depravity. It 
means that Christ is eternally He who is willing to confront and deeply consider and risk 
the temptations posed by the most malevolent elements of human nature. It means that 
Christ is always he who is willing to confront evil-consciously, fully and voluntarily-in 
the form that dwelt simultaneously within Him and in the world. This is nothing merely 
abstract (although it is abstract); nothing to be brushed over. It's no merely intellectual 
matter. 

Soldiers who develop post-traumatic stress disorder frequently develop it not because 
of something they saw, but because of something they did. There are many demons, so 
to speak, on the battlefield. Involvement in warfare is something that can open a gateway 
to Hell. Now and then something climbs through and possesses some naive farm-boy 
from Iowa, and he turns monstrous. He does something terrible. He rapes and kills the 
women and massacres the infants of My Lai. And he watches himself do it. And some 
dark part of him enjoys it-and that is the part that is most unforgettable. And, later, he 
will not know how to reconcile himself with the reality about himself and the world that 
was then revealed. And no wonder. 

In the great and fundamental myths of ancient Egypt, the god Horus-often regarded as 
a precursor to Christ, historically and conceptually speaking -experienced the same 
thing, when he confronted his evil uncle Set, usurper of the throne of Osiris, Horus's 
father. Horus, the all-seeing Egyptian falcon god, the Egyptian eye of supreme, eternal 
attention itself, has the courage to contend with Set's true nature, meeting him in direct 
combat. In the struggle with his dread uncle, however, his consciousness is damaged. He 
loses an eye. This is despite his godly stature and his unparalleled capacity for vision. 
What would a mere man lose, who attempted the same thing? But perhaps he might gain 
in internal vision and understanding something proportional to what he loses in 
perception of the outside world. 

Satan embodies the refusal of sacrifice; he is arrogance, incarnate; spite, deceit, and 
cruel, conscious malevolence. He is pure hatred of Man, God and Being. He will not 
humble himself, even when he knows full well that he should. Furthermore, he knows 
exactly what he is doing, obsessed with the desire for destruction, and does it 
deliberately, thoughtfully and completely. It has to be him, therefore-the very archetype 
of Evil-who confronts and tempts Christ, the archetype of Good. It must be him who 
offers to the Savior of Mankind, under the most trying of conditions, what all men most 
ardently desire. 


131 


Satan first tempts the starving Christ to quell His hunger by transforming the desert 
rocks into bread. Then he suggests that He throw Himself off a cliff calling on God and 
the angels to break His fall. Christ responds to the first temptation by saying, "One does 
not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God." What 
does this answer mean? It means that even under conditions of extreme privation, there 
are more important things than food. To put it another way: Bread is of little use to the 
man who has betrayed his soul, even if he is currently starving. Christ could clearly 
use his near-infinite power, as Satan indicates, to gain bread, now-to break his fast- 
even, in the broader sense, to gain wealth, in the world (which would theoretically solve 
the problem of bread, more permanently). But at what cost? And to what gain? Gluttony, 
in the midst of moral desolation? That's the poorest and most miserable of feasts. Christ 
aims, therefore, at something higher: at the description of a mode of Being that would 
finally and forever solve the problem of hunger. If we all chose instead of expedience to 
dine on the Word of God? That would require each and every person to live, and produce, 
and sacrifice, and speak, and share in a manner that would permanently render the 
privation of hunger a thing of the past. And that's how the problem of hunger in the 
privations of the desert is most truly and finally addressed. 

There are other indications of this in the gospels, in dramatic, enacted form. Christ is 
continually portrayed as the purveyor of endless sustenance. He miraculously multiplies 
bread and fish. He turns water into wine. What does this mean? It's a call to the pursuit 
of higher meaning as the mode of living that is simultaneously most practical and of 
highest quality. It's a call portrayed in dramatic/literary form: live as the archetypal 
Saviour lives, and you and those around you will hunger no more. The beneficence of the 
world manifests itself to those who live properly. That's better than bread. That's better 
than the money that will buy bread. Thus Christ, the symbolically perfect individual, 
overcomes the first temptation. Two more follow. 

"Throw yourself off that cliff," Satan says, offering the next temptation. "If God exists, 
He will surely save you. If you are in fact his Son, God will surely save you." Why would 
God not make Himself manifest, to rescue His only begotten Child from hunger and 
isolation and the presence of great evil? But that establishes no pattern for life. It doesn't 
even work as literature. The deus ex machina -the emergence of a divine force that 
magically rescues the hero from his predicament-is the cheapest trick in the hack 
writer's playbook. It makes a mockery of independence, and courage, and destiny, and 
free will, and responsibility. Furthermore, God is in no wise a safety net for the blind. 
He's not someone to be commanded to perform magic tricks, or forced into Self- 
revelation-not even by His own Son. 

"Do not put the Lord your God to the test" (Matthew 4:7)-this answer, though rather 
brief, dispenses with the second temptation. Christ does not casually order or even dare 
ask God to intervene on his behalf. He refuses to dispense with His responsibility for the 
events of His own life. He refuses to demand that God prove His presence. He refuses, as 
well, to solve the problems of mortal vulnerability in a merely personal manner)-by 
compelling God to save Him-because that would not solve the problem for everyone else 
and for all time. There is also the echo of the rejection of the comforts of insanity in this 
forgone temptation. Easy but psychotic self-identification as the merely magical Messiah 
might well have been a genuine temptation under the harsh conditions of Christ's sojourn 
in the desert. Instead He rejects the idea that salvation-or even survival, in the shorter 
term-depends on narcissistic displays of superiority and the commanding of God, even 
by His Son. 

Finally comes the third temptation, the most compelling of all. Christ sees the 
kingdoms of the world laid before Him for the taking. That's the siren call of earthly 
power: the opportunity to control and order everyone and everything. Christ is offered the 


132 


pinnacle of the dominance hierarchy, the animalistic desire of every naked ape: the 
obedience of all, the most wondrous of estates, the power to build and to increase, the 
possibility of unlimited sensual gratification. That's expedience, writ large. But that's not 
all. Such expansion of status also provides unlimited opportunity for the inner darkness 
to reveal itself. The lust for blood, rape and destruction is very much part of power's 
attraction. It is not only that men desire power so that they will no longer suffer. It is not 
only that they desire power so that they can overcome subjugation to want, disease and 
death. Power also means the capacity to take vengeance, ensure submission, and crush 
enemies. Grant Cain enough power and he will not only kill Abel. He will torture him, 
first, imaginatively and endlessly. Then and only then will he kill him. Then he will come 
after everyone else. 

There's something above even the pinnacle of the highest of dominance hierarchies, 
access to which should not be sacrificed for mere proximal success. It's a real place, too, 
although not to be conceptualized in the standard geographical sense of place we typically 
use to orient ourselves. I had a vision, once, of an immense landscape, spread for miles 
out to the horizon before me. I was high in the air, granted a bird's-eye view. Everywhere 
I could see great stratified multi-storied pyramids of glass, some small, some large, some 
overlapping, some separate-all akin to modern skyscrapers; all full of people striving to 
reach each pyramid's very pinnacle. But there was something above that pinnacle, a 
domain outside each pyramid, in which all were nested. That was the privileged position 
of the eye that could or perhaps chose to soar freely above the fray; that chose not to 
dominate any specific group or cause but instead to somehow simultaneously transcend 
all. That was attention, itself, pure and untrammeled: detached, alert, watchful attention, 
waiting to act when the time was right and the place had been established. As the Tao te 
Ching has it: 

He who contrives, defeats his purpose; 

and he who is grasping, loses. 

The sage does not contrive to win, 

and therefore is not defeated; 

he is not grasping, so does not lose.} 

There is a powerful call to proper Being in the story of the third temptation. To obtain the 
greatest possible prize-the establishment of the Kingdom of God on Earth, the 
resurrection of Paradise-the individual must conduct his or her life in a manner that 
requires the rejection of immediate gratification, of natural and perverse desires alike, no 
matter how powerfully and convincingly and realistically those are offered, and dispense, 
as well with the temptations of evil. Evil amplifies the catastrophe of life, increasing 
dramatically the motivation for expediency already there because of the essential tragedy 
of Being. Sacrifice of the more prosaic sort can keep that tragedy at bay, more or less 
successfully, but it takes a special kind of sacrifice to defeat evil. It is the description of 
that special sacrifice that has preoccupied the Christian (and more than Christian) 
imagination for centuries. Why has it not had the desired effect? Why do we remain 
unconvinced that there is no better plan than lifting our heads skyward, aiming at the 
Good, and sacrificing everything to that ambition? Have we merely failed to understand, 
or have we fallen, wilfully or otherwise, off the path? 

Christianity and its Problems 

Carl Jung hypothesized that the European mind found itself motivated to develop the 
cognitive technologies of science-to investigate the material world-after implicitly 
concluding that Christianity, with its laser-like emphasis on spiritual salvation, had failed 
to sufficiently address the problem of suffering in the here-and-now. This realization 
became unbearably acute in the three or four centuries before the Renaissance. In 


133 


consequence, a strange, profound, compensatory fantasy began to emerge, deep in the 
collective Western psyche, manifesting itself first in the strange musings of alchemy, and 
developing only after many centuries into the fully articulated form of science. - It was 
the alchemists who first seriously began to examine the transformations of matter, 
hoping to discover the secrets of health, wealth and longevity. These great dreamers 
(Newton foremost among them ) intuited and then imagined that the material world, 
damned by the Church, held secrets the revelation of which could free humanity from its 
earthly pain and limitations. It was that vision, driven by doubt, that provided the 
tremendous collective and individual motivational power necessary for the development 
of science, with its extreme demands on individual thinkers for concentration and delay of 
gratification. 

This is not to say that Christianity, even in its incompletely realized form, was a failure. 
Quite the contrary: Christianity achieved the well-nigh impossible. The Christian doctrine 
elevated the individual soul, placing slave and master and commoner and nobleman alike 
on the same metaphysical footing, rendering them equal before God and the law. 
Christianity insisted that even the king was only one among many. For something so 
contrary to all apparent evidence to find its footing, the idea that that worldly power and 
prominence were indicators of God's particular favor had to be radically de-emphasized. 
This was partly accomplished through the strange Christian insistence that salvation 
could not be obtained through effort or worth-through "works."- Whatever its 
limitations, the development of such doctrine prevented king, aristocrat and wealthy 
merchant alike from lording it morally over the commoner. In consequence, the 
metaphysical conception of the implicit transcendent worth of each and every soul 
established itself against impossible odds as the fundamental presupposition of Western 
law and society. That was not the case in the world of the past, and is not the case yet in 
most places in the world of the present. It is in fact nothing short of a miracle (and we 
should keep this fact firmly before our eyes) that the hierarchical slave-based societies of 
our ancestors reorganized themselves, under the sway of an ethical/religious revelation, 
such that the ownership and absolute domination of another person came to be viewed as 
wrong. 

It would do us well to remember, as well, that the immediate utility of slavery is 
obvious, and that the argument that the strong should dominate the weak is compelling, 
convenient and eminently practical (at least for the strong). This means that a 
revolutionary critique of everything slave-owning societies valued was necessary before 
the practice could be even questioned, let alone halted (including the idea that wielding 
power and authority made the slave-owner noble; including the even more fundamental 
idea that the power wielded by the slave-owner was valid and even virtuous). Christianity 
made explicit the surprising claim that even the lowliest person had rights, genuine rights 
-and that sovereign and state were morally charged, at a fundamental level, to recognize 
those rights. Christianity put forward, explicitly, the even more incomprehensible idea 
that the act of human ownership degraded the slaver (previously viewed as admiring 
nobility) much or even more than the slave. We fail to understand how difficult such an 
idea is to grasp. We forget that the opposite was self-evident throughout most of human 
history. We think that it is the desire to enslave and dominate that requires explanation. 
We have it backwards, yet again. 

This is not to say that Christianity was without its problems. But it is more appropriate 
to note that they were the sort of problems that emerge only after an entirely different set 
of more serious problems has been solved. The society produced by Christianity was far 
less barbaric than the pagan-even the Roman-ones it replaced. Christian society at least 
recognized that feeding slaves to ravenous lions for the entertainment of the populace 
was wrong, even if many barbaric practices still existed. It objected to infanticide, to 


134 


prostitution, and to the principle that might means right. It insisted that women were as 
valuable as men (even though we are still working out how to manifest that insistence 
politically). It demanded that even a society's enemies be regarded as human. Finally, it 
separated church from state, so that all-too-human emperors could no longer claim the 
veneration due to gods. All of this was asking the impossible: but it happened. 

As the Christian revolution progressed, however, the impossible problems it had solved 
disappeared from view. That's what happens to problems that are solved. And after the 
solution was implemented, even the fact that such problems had ever existed disappeared from 
view. Then and only then could the problems that remained, less amenable to quick 
solution by Christian doctrine, come to occupy a central place in the consciousness of the 
West-come to motivate, for example, the development of science, aimed at resolving the 
corporeal, material suffering that was still all-too-painfully extant within successfully 
Christianized societies. The fact that automobiles pollute only becomes a problem of 
sufficient magnitude to attract public attention when the far worse problems that the 
internal combustion engine solves has vanished from view. People stricken with poverty 
don't care about carbon dioxide. It's not precisely that C02 levels are irrelevant. It's that 
they're irrelevant when you're working yourself to death, starving, scraping a bare living 
from the stony, unyielding, thorn-and-thistle-infested ground. It's that they're irrelevant 
until after the tractor is invented and hundreds of millions stop starving. In any case, by 
the time Nietzsche entered the picture, in the late nineteenth century, the problems 
Christianity had left unsolved had become paramount. 

Nietzsche described himself, with no serious overstatement, as philosophizing with a 
hammer. His devastating critique of Christianity-already weakened by its conflict 
with the very science to which it had given rise-involved two main lines of attack. 
Nietzsche claimed, first, that it was precisely the sense of truth developed in the highest 
sense by Christianity itself that ultimately came to question and then to undermine the 
fundamental presuppositions of the faith. That was partly because the difference between 
moral or narrative truth and objective truth had not yet been fully comprehended (and so 
an opposition was presumed where none necessarily exists)-but that does not bely the 
point. Even when the modern atheists opposed to Christianity belittle fundamentalists for 
insisting, for example, that the creation account in Genesis is objectively true, they are 
using their sense of truth, highly developed over the centuries of Christian culture, to 
engage in such argumentation. Carl Jung continued to develop Nietzsche's arguments 
decades later, pointing out that Europe awoke, during the Enlightenment, as if from a 
Christian dream, noticing that everything it had heretofore taken for granted could and 
should be questioned. "God is dead," said Nietzsche. "God remains dead. And we have 
killed him. How shall we, murderers of all murderers, console ourselves? That which was 
the holiest and mightiest of all that the world has yet possessed has bled to death under 
our knives. Who will wipe this blood off us?"-- 

The central dogmas of the Western faith were no longer credible, according to 
Nietzsche, given what the Western mind now considered truth. But it was his second 
attack-on the removal of the true moral burden of Christianity during the development 
of the Church-that was most devastating. The hammer-wielding philosopher mounted 
an assault on an early-established and then highly influential line of Christian thinking: 
that Christianity meant accepting the proposition that Christ's sacrifice, and only that sacrifice, had 
redeemed humanity. This did not mean, absolutely, that a Christian who believed that 
Christ died on the cross for the salvation of mankind was thereby freed from any and all 
personal moral obligation. But it did strongly imply that the primary responsibility for 
redemption had already been borne by the Saviour, and that nothing too important to do 
remained for all-too-fallen human individuals. 


135 


Nietzsche believed that Paul, and later the Protestants following Luther, had removed 
moral responsibility from Christ's followers. They had watered down the idea of the 
imitation of Christ. This imitation was the sacred duty of the believer not to adhere (or 
merely to mouth) a set of statements about abstract belief but instead to actually manifest 
the spirit of the Saviour in the particular, specific conditions of his or her life-to realize 
or incarnate the archetype, as Jung had it; to clothe the eternal pattern in flesh. Nietzsche 
writes, "The Christians have never practiced the actions Jesus prescribed them; and the 
impudent garrulous talk about the 'justification by faith' and its supreme and sole 
significance is only the consequence of the Church's lack of courage and will to profess 
the works Jesus demanded."! Nietzsche was, indeed, a critic without parallel. 

Dogmatic belief in the central axioms of Christianity (that Christ's crucifixion 
redeemed the world; that salvation was reserved for the hereafter; that salvation could not 
be achieved through works) had three mutually reinforcing consequences: First, 
devaluation of the significance of earthly life, as only the hereafter mattered. This also meant that 
it had become acceptable to overlook and shirk responsibility for the suffering that 
existed in the here-and-now; Second, passive acceptance of the status quo, because salvation 
could not be earned in any case through effort in this life (a consequence that Marx also derided, 
with his proposition that religion was the opiate of the masses); and, finally, third, the 
right of the believer to reject any real moral burden (outside of the stated belief in salvation 
through Christ), because the Son of God had already done all the important work. It was for 
such reasons that Dostoevsky, who was a great influence on Nietzsche, also criticized 
institutional Christianity (although he arguably managed it in a more ambiguous but also 
more sophisticated manner). In his masterwork, The Brothers Karamazov, Dostoevsky has 
his atheist superman, Ivan, tell a little story, "The Grand Inquisitor."! A brief review is 
in order. 

Ivan speaks to his brother Alyosha-whose pursuits as a monastic novitiate he holds in 
contempt-of Christ returning to Earth at the time of the Spanish Inquisition. The 
returning Savior makes quite a ruckus, as would be expected. He heals the sick. He raises 
the dead. His antics soon attract attention from the Grand Inquisitor himself, who 
promptly has Christ arrested and thrown into a prison cell. Later, the Inquisitor pays Him 
a visit. He informs Christ that he is no longer needed. His return is simply too great a 
threat to the Church. The Inquisitor tells Christ that the burden He laid on mankind-the 
burden of existence in faith and truth-was simply too great for mere mortals to bear. 
The Inquisitor claims that the Church, in its mercy, diluted that message, lifting the 
demand for perfect Being from the shoulders of its followers, providing them instead with 
the simple and merciful escapes of faith and the afterlife. That work took centuries, says 
the Inquisitor, and the last thing the Church needs after all that effort is the return of the 
Man who insisted that people bear all the weight in the first place. Christ listens in 
silence. Then, as the Inquisitor turns to leave, Christ embraces him, and kisses him on 
the lips. The Inquisitor turns white, in shock. Then he goes out, leaving the cell door 
open. 

The profundity of this story and the greatness of spirit necessary to produce it can 
hardly be exaggerated. Dostoevsky, one of the great literary geniuses of all time, 
confronted the most serious existential problems in all his great writings, and he did so 
courageously, headlong, and heedless of the consequences. Clearly Christian, he 
nonetheless adamantly refuses to make a straw man of his rationalist and atheistic 
opponents. Quite the contrary: In The Brothers Karamazov, for example, Dostoevsky's 
atheist, Ivan, argues against the presuppositions of Christianity with unsurpassable clarity 
and passion. Alyosha, aligned with the Church by temperament and decision, cannot 
undermine a single one of his brother's arguments (although his faith remains 
unshakeable). Dostoevsky knew and admitted that Christianity had been defeated by the 


136 


rational faculty-by the intellect, even-but (and this is of primary importance) he did not 
hide from that fact. He didn't attempt through denial or deceit or even satire to weaken the 
position that opposed what he believed to be most true and valuable. He instead placed 
action above words, and addressed the problem successfully. By the novel's end, 
Dostoevsky has the great embodied moral goodness of Alyosha-the novitiate's 
courageous imitation of Christ-attain victory over the spectacular but ultimately 
nihilistic critical intelligence of Ivan. 

The Christian church described by the Grand Inquisitor is the same church pilloried by 
Nietzsche. Childish, sanctimonious, patriarchal, servant of the state, that church is 
everything rotten still objected to by modern critics of Christianity. Nietzsche, for all his 
brilliance, allows himself anger, but does not perhaps sufficiently temper it with 
judgement. This is where Dostoevsky truly transcends Nietzsche, in my estimation- 
where Dostoevsky's great literature transcends Nietzsche's mere philosophy. The Russian 
writer's Inquisitor is the genuine article, in every sense. He is an opportunistic, cynical, 
manipulative and cruel interrogator, willing to persecute heretics-even to torture and kill 
them. He is the purveyor of a dogma he knows to be false. But Dostoevsky has Christ, the 
archetypal perfect man, kiss him anyway. Equally importantly, in the aftermath of the 
kiss, the Grand Inquisitor leaves the door ajar so Christ can escape his pending execution. 
Dostoevsky saw that the great, corrupt edifice of Christianity still managed to make room 
for the spirit of its Founder. That's the gratitude of a wise and profound soul for the 
enduring wisdom of the West, despite its faults. 

It's not as if Nietzsche was unwilling to give the faith-and, more particularly, 
Catholicism-its due. Nietzsche believed that the long tradition of "unfreedom" 
characterizing dogmatic Christianity-its insistence that everything be explained within 
the confines of a single, coherent metaphysical theory-was a necessary precondition for 
the emergence of the disciplined but free modern mind. As he stated in Beyond Good and 
Evil: 

The long bondage of the spirit ... the persistent spiritual will to interpret everything that happened according to 
a Christian scheme, and in every occurrence to rediscover and justify the Christian God in every accident:-all 
this violence, arbitrariness, severity, dreadfulness, and unreasonableness, has proved itself the disciplinary 
means whereby the European spirit has attained its strength, its remorseless curiosity and subtle mobility; 
granted also that much irrecoverable strength and spirit had to be stifled, suffocated and spoiled in the 
146 

process. ilr. 

For Nietzsche and Dostoevsky alike, freedom-even the ability to act-requires 
constraint. For this reason, they both recognized the vital necessity of the dogma of the 
Church. The individual must be constrained, moulded-even brought close to destruction 
-by a restrictive, coherent disciplinary structure, before he or she can act freely and 
competently. Dostoevsky, with his great generosity of spirit, granted to the church, 
corrupt as it might be, a certain element of mercy, a certain pragmatism. He admitted that 
the spirit of Christ, the world-engendering Fogos, had historically and might still find its 
resting place-even its sovereignty-within that dogmatic structure. 

If a father disciplines his son properly, he obviously interferes with his freedom, 
particularly in the here-and-now. He put limits on the voluntary expression of his son's 
Being, forcing him to take his place as a socialized member of the world. Such a father 
requires that all that childish potential be funneled down a singly pathway. In placing 
such limitations on his son, he might be considered a destructive force, acting as he does 
to replace the miraculous plurality of childhood with a single narrow actuality. But if the 
father does not take such action, he merely lets his son remain Peter Pan, the eternal Boy, 
King of the Fost Boys, Ruler of the non-existent Neverland. That is not a morally 
acceptable alternative. 

The dogma of the Church was undermined by the spirit of truth strongly developed by 
the Church itself. That undermining culminated in the death of God. But the dogmatic 


137 


structure of the Church was a necessary disciplinary structure. A long period of 
unfreedom-adherence to a singular interpretive structure-is necessary for the 
development of a free mind. Christian dogma provided that unfreedom. But the dogma is 
dead, at least to the modern Western mind. It perished along with God. What has 
emerged from behind its corpse, however-and this is an issue of central importance-is 
something even more dead; something that was never alive, even in the past: nihilism, as 
well as an equally dangerous susceptibility to new, totalizing, utopian ideas. It was in the 
aftermath of God's death that the great collective horrors of Communism and Fascism 
sprang forth (as both Dostoevsky and Nietzsche predicted they would). Nietzsche, for his 
part, posited that individual human beings would have to invent their own values in the 
aftermath of God's death. But this is the element of his thinking that appears weakest, 
psychologically: we cannot invent our own values, because we cannot merely impose what we 
believe on our souls. This was Carl Jung's great discovery-made in no little part because of 
his intense study of the problems posed by Nietzsche. 

We rebel against our own totalitarianism, as much as that of others. I cannot merely 
order myself to action, and neither can you. "I will stop procrastinating," I say, but I 
don't. "I will eat properly," I say, but I don't. "I will end my drunken misbehavior," I say, 
but I don't. I cannot merely make myself over in the image constructed by my intellect 
(particularly if that intellect is possessed by an ideology). I have a nature, and so do you, 
and so do we all. We must discover that nature, and contend with it, before making peace 
with ourselves. What is it, that we most truly are? What is it that we could most truly 
become, knowing who we most truly are? We must get to the very bottom of things 
before such questions can be truly answered. 

Doubt, Past Mere Nihilism 

Three hundred years before Nietzsche, the great French philosopher Rene Descartes set 
out on an intellectual mission to take his doubt seriously, to break things apart, to get to 
what was essential-to see if he could establish, or discover, a single proposition 
impervious to his skepticism. He was searching for the foundation stone on which proper 
Being could be established. Descartes found it, as far as he was concerned, in the "I" who 
thinks-the "I" who was aware-as expressed in his famous dictum, cogito ergo sum (I 
think, therefore I am). But that "I" had been conceptualized long before. Thousands of 
years ago, the aware "I" was the all-seeing eye of Horus, the great Egyptian son-and-sun- 
god, who renewed the state by attending to and then confronting its inevitable 
corruption. Before that, it was the creator-God Marduk of the Mesopotamians, whose 
eyes encircled his head and who spoke forth words of world-engendering magic. During 
the Christian epoch, the "l" transformed into the Logos, the Word that speaks order into 
Being at the beginning of time. It might be said that Descartes merely secularized the 
Logos, turning it, more explicitly, into "that which is aware and thinks." That's the 
modern self, simply put. But what exactly is that self? 

We can understand, to some degree, its horrors, if we wish to, but its goodness remains 
more difficult to define. The self is the great actor of evil who strode about the stage of 
Being as Nazi and Stalinist alike; who produced Auschwitz, Buchenwald, Dachau, and the 
multiplicity of the Soviet gulags. And all of that must be considered with dread 
seriousness. But what is its opposite? What is the good that is the necessary counterpart 
of that evil; that is made more corporeal and comprehensible by the very existence of that 
evil? And here we can state with conviction and clarity that even the rational intellect- 
that faculty so beloved of those who hold traditional wisdom in contempt-is at 
minimum something closely and necessarily akin to the archetypal dying and eternally 
resurrected god, the eternal savior of humanity, the Logos itself. The philosopher of 


138 



science Karl Popper, certainly no mystic, regarded thinking itself as a logical extension of 
the Darwinian process. A creature that cannot think must solely embody its Being. It can 
merely act out its nature, concretely, in the here-and-now. If it cannot manifest in its 
behavior what the environment demands while doing so, it will simply die. But that is not 
true of human beings. We can produce abstracted representations of potential modes of 
Being. We can produce an idea in the theatre of the imagination. We can test it out 
against our other ideas, the ideas of others, or the world itself. If it falls short, we can let 
it go. We can, in Popper's formulation, let our ideas die in our stead. Then the 
essential part, the creator of those ideas, can continue onward, now untrammeled, by 
comparison, with error. Faith in the part of us that continues across those deaths is a prerequisite 
to thinking itself. 

Now, an idea is not the same thing as a fact. A fact is something that is dead, in and of 
itself. It has no consciousness, no will to power, no motivation, no action. There are 
billions of dead facts. The internet is a graveyard of dead facts. But an idea that grips a 
person is alive. It wants to express itself, to live in the world. It is for this reason that the 
depth psychologists-Freud and Jung paramount among them-insisted that the human 
psyche was a battleground for ideas. An idea has an aim. It wants something. It posits a value 
structure. An idea believes that what it is aiming for is better than what it has now. It 
reduces the world to those things that aid or impede its realization, and it reduces 
everything else to irrelevance. An idea defines figure against ground. An idea is a 
personality, not a fact. When it manifests itself within a person, it has a strong proclivity to 
make of that person its avatar: to impel that person to act it out. Sometimes, that 
impulsion (possession is another word) can be so strong that the person will die, rather 
than allowing the idea to perish. This is, generally speaking, a bad decision, given that it 
is often the case that only the idea need die, and that the person with the idea can stop 
being its avatar, change his or her ways, and continue. 

To use the dramatic conceptualization of our ancestors: It is the most fundamental 
convictions that must die-must be sacrificed-when the relationship with God has been 
disrupted (when the presence of undue and often intolerable suffering, for example, 
indicates that something has to change). This is to say nothing other than that the future 
can be made better if the proper sacrifices take place in the present. No other animal has 
ever figured this out, and it took us untold hundreds of thousands of years to do it. It 
took further eons of observation and hero-worship, and then millennia of study, to distill 
that idea into a story. It then took additional vast stretches of time to assess that story, to 
incorporate it, so that we now can simply say, "If you are disciplined and privilege the 
future over the present you can change the structure of reality in your favour." 

But how best to do that? 

In 1984, I started down the same road as Descartes. I did not know it was the same 
road at the time, and I am not claiming kinship with Descartes, who is rightly regarded as 
one of the greatest philosophers of all time. But I was truly plagued with doubt. I had 
outgrown the shallow Christianity of my youth by the time I could understand the 
fundamentals of Darwinian theory. After that, I could not distinguish the basic elements 
of Christian belief from wishful thinking. The socialism that soon afterward became so 
attractive to me as an alternative proved equally insubstantial; with time, I came to 
understand, through the great George Orwell, that much of such thinking found its 
motivation in hatred of the rich and successful, instead of true regard for the poor. 
Besides, the socialists were more intrinsically capitalist than the capitalists. They believed 
just as strongly in money. They just thought that if different people had the money, the 
problems plaguing humanity would vanish. This is simply untrue. There are many 
problems that money does not solve, and others that it makes worse. Rich people still 
divorce each other, and alienate themselves from their children, and suffer from 


139 


existential angst, and develop cancer and dementia, and die alone and unloved. 
Recovering addicts cursed with money blow it all in a frenzy of snorting and drunkenness. 
And boredom weighs heavily on people who have nothing to do. 

I was simultaneously tormented by the fact of the Cold War. It obsessed me. It gave me 
nightmares. It drove me into the desert, into the long night of the human soul. I could not 
understand how it had come to pass that the world's two great factions aimed mutual 
assured destruction at each other. Was one system just as arbitrary and corrupt as the 
other? Was it a mere matter of opinion? Were all value structures merely the clothing of 
power? 

Was everyone crazy? 

Just exactly what happened in the twentieth century, anyway? How was it that so many 
tens of millions had to die, sacrificed to the new dogmas and ideologies? How was it that 
we discovered something worse, much worse, than the aristocracy and corrupt religious 
beliefs that communism and fascism sought so rationally to supplant? No one had 
answered those questions, as far as I could tell. Like Descartes, I was plagued with doubt. 
I searched for one thing-anything-I could regard as indisputable. I wanted a rock upon 
which to build my house. It was doubt that led me to it. 

I once read of a particularly insidious practice at Auschwitz. A guard would force an 
inmate to carry a hundred-pound sack of wet salt from one side of the large compound to 
the other-and then to carry it back. Arbeit macht frei, said the sign over the camp entrance 
-"Work will set you free"-and the freedom was death. Carrying the salt was an act of 
pointless torment. It was a piece of malevolent art. It allowed me to realize with certainty 
that some actions are wrong. 

Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn wrote, definitively and profoundly, about the horrors of the 
twentieth century, the tens of millions who were stripped of employment, family, identity 
and life. In his Gulag Archipelago, in the second part of the second volume, he discussed 
the Nuremburg trials, which he considered the most significant event of the twentieth 
century. The conclusion of those trials? There are some actions that are so intrinsically terrible 
that they run counter to the proper nature of human Being. This is true essentially, cross- 
culturally-across time and place. These are evil actions. No excuses are available for engaging in 
them. To dehumanize a fellow being, to reduce him or her to the status of a parasite, to 
torture and to slaughter with no consideration of individual innocence or guilt, to make 
an art form of pain-that is wrong. 

What can I not doubt? The reality of suffering. It brooks no arguments. Nihilists cannot 
undermine it with skepticism. Totalitarians cannot banish it. Cynics cannot escape from 
its reality. Suffering is real, and the artful infliction of suffering on another, for its own 
sake, is wrong. That became the cornerstone of my belief. Searching through the lowest 
reaches of human thought and action, understanding my own capacity to act like a Nazi 
prison guard or a gulag archipelago trustee or a torturer of children in a dungeon, I 
grasped what it meant to "take the sins of the world onto oneself." Each human being has 
an immense capacity for evil. Each human being understands, a priori, perhaps not what is 
good, but certainly what is not. And if there is something that is not good, then there is 
something that is good. If the worst sin is the torment of others, merely for the sake of the 
suffering produced-then the good is whatever is diametrically opposed to that. The good 
is whatever stops such things from happening. 

Meaning as the Higher Good 

It was from this that I drew my fundamental moral conclusions. Aim up. Pay attention. 
Fix what you can fix. Don't be arrogant in your knowledge. Strive for humility, because 
totalitarian pride manifests itself in intolerance, oppression, torture and death. Become 


140 



aware of your own insufficiency-your cowardice, malevolence, resentment and hatred. 
Consider the murderousness of your own spirit before you dare accuse others, and before 
you attempt to repair the fabric of the world. Maybe it's not the world that's at fault. 
Maybe it's you. You've failed to make the mark. You've missed the target. You've fallen 
short of the glory of God. You've sinned. And all of that is your contribution to the 
insufficiency and evil of the world. And, above all, don't lie. Don't lie about anything, 
ever. Lying leads to Hell. It was the great and the small lies of the Nazi and Communist 
states that produced the deaths of millions of people. 

Consider then that the alleviation of unnecessary pain and suffering is a good. Make 
that an axiom: to the best of my ability I will act in a manner that leads to the alleviation 
of unnecessary pain and suffering. You have now placed at the pinnacle of your moral 
hierarchy a set of presuppositions and actions aimed at the betterment of Being. Why? 
Because we know the alternative. The alternative was the twentieth century. The 
alternative was so close to Hell that the difference is not worth discussing. And the 
opposite of Hell is Heaven. To place the alleviation of unnecessary pain and suffering at 
the pinnacle of your hierarchy of value is to work to bring about the Kingdom of God on 
Earth. That's a state, and a state of mind, at the same time. 

Jung observed that the construction of such a moral hierarchy was inevitable-although 
it could remain poorly arranged and internally self-contradictory. For Jung, whatever was 
at the top of an individual's moral hierarchy was, for all intents and purposes, that 
person's ultimate value, that person's god. It was what the person acted out. It was what 
the person believed most deeply. Something enacted is not a fact, or even a set of facts. 
Instead, it's a personality-or, more precisely, a choice between two opposing 
personalities. It's Sherlock Holmes or Moriarty. It's Batman or the Joker. It's Superman or 
Lex Luthor, Charles Francis Xavier or Magneto, and Thor or Loki. It's Abel or Cain-and 
it's Christ or Satan. If it's working for the ennobling of Being, for the establishment of 
Paradise, then it's Christ. If it's working for the destruction of Being, for the generation 
and propagation of unnecessary suffering and pain, then it's Satan. That's the inescapable, 
archetypal reality. 

Expedience is the following of blind impulse. It's short-term gain. It's narrow, and 
selfish. It lies to get its way. It takes nothing into account. It's immature and 
irresponsible. Meaning is its mature replacement. Meaning emerges when impulses are 
regulated, organized and unified. Meaning emerges from the interplay between the 
possibilities of the world and the value structure operating within that world. If the value 
structure is aimed at the betterment of Being, the meaning revealed will be life- 
sustaining. It will provide the antidote for chaos and suffering. It will make everything 
matter. It will make everything better. 

If you act properly, your actions allow you to be psychologically integrated now, and 
tomorrow, and into the future, while you benefit yourself, your family, and the broader 
world around you. Everything will stack up and align along a single axis. Everything will 
come together. This produces maximal meaning. This stacking up is a place in space and 
time whose existence we can detect with our ability to experience more than is simply 
revealed here and now by our senses, which are obviously limited to their information- 
gathering and representational capacity. Meaning trumps expedience. Meaning gratifies 
all impulses, now and forever. That's why we can detect it. 

If you decide that you are not justified in your resentment of Being, despite its inequity 
and pain, you may come to notice things you could fix to reduce even by a bit some 
unnecessary pain and suffering. You may come to ask yourself, "What should I do today?" 
in a manner that means "How could I use my time to make things better, instead of 
worse?" Such tasks may announce themselves as the pile of undone paperwork that you 


141 



could attend to, the room that you could make a bit more welcoming, or the meal that 
could be a bit more delicious and more gratefully delivered to your family. 

You may find that if you attend to these moral obligations, once you have placed "make 
the world better" at the top of your value hierarchy, you experience ever-deepening 
meaning. It's not bliss. It's not happiness. It is something more like atonement for the 
criminal fact of your fractured and damaged Being. It's payment of the debt you owe for 
the insane and horrible miracle of your existence. It's how you remember the Holocaust. 
It's how you make amends for the pathology of history. It's adoption of the responsibility 
for being a potential denizen of Hell. It is willingness to serve as an angel of Paradise. 

Expedience-that's hiding all the skeletons in the closet. That's covering the blood you 
just spilled with a carpet. That's avoiding responsibility. It's cowardly, and shallow, and 
wrong. It's wrong because mere expedience, multiplied by many repetitions, produces the 
character of a demon. It's wrong because expedience merely transfers the curse on your 
head to someone else, or to your future self, in a manner that will make your future, and 
the future generally, worse instead of better. 

There is no faith and no courage and no sacrifice in doing what is expedient. There is 
no careful observation that actions and presuppositions matter, or that the world is made 
of what matters. To have meaning in your life is better than to have what you want, 
because you may neither know what you want, nor what you truly need. Meaning is 
something that comes upon you, of its own accord. You can set up the preconditions, you 
can follow meaning, when it manifests itself, but you cannot simply produce it, as an act 
of will. Meaning signifies that you are in the right place, at the right time, properly 
balanced between order and chaos, where everything lines up as best it can at that 
moment. 

What is expedient works only for the moment. It's immediate, impulsive and limited. 
What is meaningful, by contrast, is the organization of what would otherwise merely be 
expedient into a symphony of Being. Meaning is what is put forth more powerfully than 
mere words can express by Beethoven's "Ode to Joy," a triumphant bringing forth from 
the void of pattern after pattern upon beautiful pattern, every instrument playing its part, 
disciplined voices layered on top of that, spanning the entire breadth of human emotion 
from despair to exhilaration. 

Meaning is what manifests itself when the many levels of Being arrange themselves into 
a perfectly functioning harmony, from atomic microcosm to cell to organ to individual to 
society to nature to cosmos, so that action at each level beautifully and perfectly facilitates 
action at all, such that past, present and future are all at once redeemed and reconciled. 
Meaning is what emerges beautifully and profoundly like a newly formed rosebud opening 
itself out of nothingness into the light of sun and God. Meaning is the lotus striving 
upward through the dark lake depths through the ever-clearing water, blooming forth on 
the very surface, revealing within itself the Golden Buddha, himself perfectly integrated, 
such that the revelation of the Divine Will can make itself manifest in his every word and 
gesture. 

Meaning is when everything there is comes together in an ecstatic dance of single 
purpose-the glorification of a reality so that no matter how good it has suddenly 
become, it can get better and better and better more and more deeply forever into the 
future. Meaning happens when that dance has become so intense that all the horrors of 
the past, all the terrible struggle engaged in by all of life and all of humanity to that 
moment becomes a necessary and worthwhile part of the increasingly successful attempt 
to build something truly Mighty and Good. 

Meaning is the ultimate balance between, on the one hand, the chaos of transformation 
and possibility and on the other, the discipline of pristine order, whose purpose is to 
produce out of the attendant chaos a new order that will be even more immaculate, and 


142 



capable of bringing forth a still more balanced and productive chaos and order. Meaning is 
the Way, the path of life more abundant, the place you live when you are guided by Love 
and speaking Truth and when nothing you want or could possibly want takes any 
precedence over precisely that. 

Do what is meaningful, not what is expedient. 


143 




mm 




a 


145 


RULE 8 

TELL THE TRUTH-OR, AT LEAST, DON'T LIE 


TRUTH IN NO-MAN'S-LAND 

I trained to become a clinical psychologist at McGill University, in Montreal. While doing 
so, I sometimes met my classmates on the grounds of Montreal's Douglas Hospital, 
where we had our first direct experiences with the mentally ill. The Douglas occupies 
acres of land and dozens of buildings. Many are connected by underground tunnels to 
protect workers and patients from the interminable Montreal winters. The hospital once 
sheltered hundreds of long-term in-house patients. This was before anti-psychotic drugs 
and the large scale deinstitutionalization movements of the late sixties all but closed 
down the residential asylums, most often dooming the now "freed" patients to a much 
harder life on the streets. By the early eighties, when I first visited the grounds, all but the 
most seriously afflicted residents had been discharged. Those who remained were strange, 
much-damaged people. They clustered around the vending machines scattered 
throughout the hospital's tunnels. They looked as if they had been photographed by 
Diane Arbus or painted by Hieronymus Bosch. 

One day my classmates and I were all standing in line. We were awaiting further 
instruction from the strait-laced German psychologist who ran the Douglas clinical 
training program. A long-term inpatient, fragile and vulnerable, approached one of the 
other students, a sheltered, conservative young woman. The patient spoke to her in a 
friendly, childlike manner, and asked, "Why are you all standing here? What are you 
doing? Can I come along with you?" My classmate turned to me and asked uncertainly, 
"What should I say to her?" She was taken aback, just as I was, by this request coming 
from someone so isolated and hurt. Neither of us wanted to say anything that might be 
construed as a rejection or reprimand. 

We had temporarily entered a kind of no-man's-land, in which society offers no ground 
rules or guidance. We were new clinical students, unprepared to be confronted on the 
grounds of a mental hospital by a schizophrenic patient asking a naive, friendly question 
about the possibility of social belonging. The natural conversational give-and-take 
between people attentive to contextual cues was not happening here, either. What exactly 
were the rules, in such a situation, far outside the boundaries of normal social 
interaction? What exactly were the options? 

There were only two, as far as I could quickly surmise. I could tell the patient a story 
designed to save everyone's face, or I could answer truthfully. "We can only take eight 
people in our group," would have fallen into the first category, as would have, "We are 
just leaving the hospital now." Neither of these answers would have bruised any feelings, 
at least on the surface, and the presence of the status differences that divided us from her 
would have gone unremarked. But neither answer would have been exactly true. So, I 
didn't offer either. 

I told the patient as simply and directly as I could that we were new students, training 
to be psychologists, and that she couldn't join us for that reason. The answer highlighted 
the distinction between her situation and ours, making the gap between us greater and 
more evident. The answer was harsher than a well-crafted white lie. But I already had an 
inkling that untruth, however well-meant, can produce unintended consequences. She 
looked crestfallen, and hurt, but only for a moment. Then she understood, and it was all 
right. That was just how it was. 


146 



I had had a strange set of experiences a few years before embarking upon my clinical 
training. - I found myself subject to some rather violent compulsions (none acted upon), 
and developed the conviction, in consequence, that I really knew rather little about who I 
was and what I was up to. So, I began paying much closer attention to what I was doing- 
and saying. The experience was disconcerting, to say the least. I soon divided myself into 
two parts: one that spoke, and one, more detached, that paid attention and judged. I soon 
came to realize that almost everything I said was untrue. I had motives for saying these 
things: I wanted to win arguments and gain status and impress people and get what I 
wanted. I was using language to bend and twist the world into delivering what I thought 
was necessary. But I was a fake. Realizing this, I started to practise only saying things that 
the internal voice would not object to. I started to practise telling the truth-or, at least, 
not lying. I soon learned that such a skill came in very handy when I didn't know what to 
do. What should you do, when you don't know what to do? Tell the truth. So, that's what 
I did my first day at the Douglas Hospital. 

Later, I had a client who was paranoid and dangerous. Working with paranoid people is 
challenging. They believe they have been targeted by mysterious conspiratorial forces, 
working malevolently behind the scenes. Paranoid people are hyper-alert and hyper- 
focused. They are attending to non-verbal cues with an intentness never manifest during 
ordinary human interactions. They make mistakes in interpretation (that's the paranoia) 
but they are still almost uncanny in their ability to detect mixed motives, judgment and 
falsehood. You have to listen very carefully and tell the truth if you are going to get a 
paranoid person to open up to you. 

I listened carefully and spoke truthfully to my client. Now and then, he would describe 
blood-curdling fantasies of flaying people for revenge. I would watch how I was reacting. I 
paid attention to what thoughts and images emerged in the theatre of my imagination 
while he spoke, and I told him what I observed. I was not trying to control or direct his 
thoughts or actions (or mine). I was only trying to let him know as transparently as I 
could how what he was doing was directly affecting at least one person-me. My careful 
attention and frank responses did not mean at all that I remained unperturbed, let alone 
approved. I told him when he scared me (often), that his words and behaviour were 
misguided, and that he was going to get into serious trouble. 

He talked to me, nonetheless, because I listened and responded honestly, even though I 
was not encouraging in my responses. He trusted me, despite (or, more accurately, 
because of) my objections. He was paranoid, not stupid. He knew his behaviour was 
socially unacceptable. He knew that any decent person was likely to react with horror to 
his insane fantasies. He trusted me and would talk to me because that's how I reacted. 
There was no chance of understanding him without that trust. 

Trouble for him generally started in a bureaucracy, such as a bank. He would enter an 
institution and attempt some simple task. He was looking to open an account, or pay a 
bill, or fix some mistake. Now and then he encountered the kind of non-helpful person 
that everyone encounters now and then in such a place. That person would reject the ID 
he offered, or require some information that was unnecessary and difficult to obtain. 
Sometimes, I suppose, the bureaucratic runaround was unavoidable-but sometimes it 
was unnecessarily complicated by petty misuses of bureaucratic power. My client was very 
attuned to such things. He was obsessed with honour. It was more important to him than 
safety, freedom or belonging. Following that logic (because paranoid people are 
impeccably logical), he could never allow himself to be demeaned, insulted or put down, 
even a little bit, by anyone. Water did not roll off his back. Because of his rigid and 
inflexible attitude, my client's actions had already been subjected to several restraining 
orders. Restraining orders work best, however, with the sort of person who would never 
require a restraining order. 


147 


"I will be your worst nightmare," was his phrase of choice, in such situations. I have 
wished intensely that I could say something like that, after encountering unnecessary 
bureaucratic obstacles, but it's generally best to let such things go. My client meant what 
he said, however, and sometimes he really did become someone's nightmare. He was the 
bad guy in No Country for Old Men. He was the person you meet in the wrong place, at the 
wrong time. If you messed with him, even accidentally, he was going to stalk you, remind 
you what you had done, and scare the living daylights out of you. He was no one to lie to. 
I told him the truth and that cooled him off. 

My Landlord 

I had a landlord around that time who had been president of a local biker gang. My wife, 
Tammy, and I lived next door to him in his parents' small apartment building. His 
girlfriend bore the marks of self-inflicted injuries characteristic of borderline personality 
disorder. She killed herself while we lived there. 

Denis, large, strong, French-Canadian, with a grey beard, was a gifted amateur 
electrician. He had some artistic talent, too, and was supporting himself making 
laminated wood posters with custom neon lights. He was trying to stay sober, after being 
released from jail. Still, every month or so, he would disappear on a days-long bender. He 
was one of those men who have a miraculous capacity for alcohol; he could drink fifty or 
sixty beer in a two-day binge and remain standing the whole time. This may seem hard to 
believe, but it's true. I was doing research on familial alcoholism at the time, and it was 
not rare for my subjects to report their fathers' habitual consumption of forty ounces of 
vodka a day. These patriarchs would buy one bottle every afternoon, Monday through 
Friday, and then two on Saturday, to tide them over through the Sunday liquor-store 
closure. 

Denis had a little dog. Sometimes Tammy and I would hear Denis and the dog out in 
the backyard at four in the morning, during one of Denis's marathon drinking sessions, 
both of them howling madly at the moon. Now and then, on occasions like that, Denis 
would drink up every cent he had saved. Then he would show up at our apartment. We 
would hear a knock at night. Denis would be at the door, swaying precipitously, upright, 
and miraculously conscious. 

He would be standing there, toaster, microwave, or poster in hand. He wanted to sell 
these to me so he could keep on drinking. I bought a few things like this, pretending that 
I was being charitable. Eventually, Tammy convinced me that I couldn't do it anymore. It 
made her nervous, and it was bad for Denis, whom she liked. Reasonable and even 
necessary as her request was, it still placed me in a tricky position. 

What do you say to a severely intoxicated, violence-prone ex-biker-gang-president with 
patchy English when he tries to sell his microwave to you at your open door at two in the 
morning? This was a question even more difficult than those presented by the 
institutionalized patient or the paranoid flayer. But the answer was the same: the truth. 
But you'd bloody well better know what the truth is. 

Denis knocked again soon after my wife and I had talked. He looked at me in the direct 
skeptical narrow-eyed manner characteristic of the tough, heavy-drinking man who is no 
stranger to trouble. That look means, "Prove your innocence." Weaving slightly back and 
forth, he asked-politely-if I might be interested in purchasing his toaster. I rid myself, 
to the bottom of my soul, of primate-dominance motivations and moral superiority. I told 
him as directly and carefully as I could that I would not. I was playing no tricks. In that 
moment I wasn't an educated, anglophone, fortunate, upwardly-mobile young man. He 
wasn't an ex-con Quebecois biker with a blood alcohol level of .24. No, we were two men 
of good will trying to help each other out in our common struggle to do the right thing. I 


148 



said that he had told me he was trying to quit drinking. I said that it would not be good 
for him if I provided him with more money. I said that he made Tammy, whom he 
respected, nervous when he came over so drunk and so late and tried to sell me things. 

He glared seriously at me without speaking for about fifteen seconds. That was plenty 
long enough. He was watching, I knew, for any micro-expression revealing sarcasm, 
deceit, contempt or self-congratulation. But I had thought it through, carefully, and I had 
only said things I truly meant. I had chosen my words, carefully, traversing a treacherous 
swamp, feeling out a partially submerged stone path. Denis turned and left. Not only that, 
he remembered our conversation, despite his state of professional-level intoxication. He 
didn't try to sell me anything again. Our relationship, which was quite good, given the 
great cultural gaps between us, became even more solid. 

Taking the easy way out or telling the truth-those are not merely two different 
choices. They are different pathways through life. They are utterly different ways of 
existing. 

Manipulate the World 

You can use words to manipulate the world into delivering what you want. This is what it 
means to "act politically." This is spin. It's the specialty of unscrupulous marketers, 
salesmen, advertisers, pickup artists, slogan-possessed Utopians and psychopaths. It's the 
speech people engage in when they attempt to influence and manipulate others. It's what 
university students do when they write an essay to please the professor, instead of 
articulating and clarifying their own ideas. It's what everyone does when they want 
something, and decide to falsify themselves to please and flatter. It's scheming and 
sloganeering and propaganda. 

To conduct life like this is to become possessed by some ill-formed desire, and then to 
craft speech and action in a manner that appears likely, rationally, to bring about that end. 
Typical calculated ends might include "to impose my ideological beliefs," "to prove that I 
am (or was) right," "to appear competent," "to ratchet myself up the dominance 
hierarchy," "to avoid responsibility" (or its twin, "to garner credit for others' actions"), 
"to be promoted," "to attract the lion's share of attention," "to ensure that everyone likes 
me," "to garner the benefits of martyrdom," "to justify my cynicism," "to rationalize my 
antisocial outlook," "to minimize immediate conflict," "to maintain my naivete," "to 
capitalize on my vulnerability," "to always appear as the sainted one," or (this one is 
particularly evil) "to ensure that it is always my unloved child's fault." These are all 
examples of what Sigmund Freud's compatriot, the lesser-known Austrian psychologist 
Alfred Adler, called "life-lies."- 

Someone living a life-lie is attempting to manipulate reality with perception, thought 
and action, so that only some narrowly desired and pre-defined outcome is allowed to 
exist. A life lived in this manner is based, consciously or unconsciously, on two premises. 
The first is that current knowledge is sufficient to define what is good, unquestioningly, 
far into the future. The second is that reality would be unbearable if left to its own 
devices. The first presumption is philosophically unjustifiable. What you are currently 
aiming at might not be worth attaining, just as what you are currently doing might be an 
error. The second is even worse. It is valid only if reality is intrinsically intolerable and, 
simultaneously, something that can be successfully manipulated and distorted. Such 
speaking and thinking requires the arrogance and certainty that the English poet John 
Milton's genius identified with Satan, God's highest angel gone most spectacularly wrong. 
The faculty of rationality inclines dangerously to pride: all I know is all that needs to be 
known. Pride falls in love with its own creations, and tries to make them absolute. 


149 


I have seen people define their utopia and then bend their lives into knots trying to 
make it reality. A left-leaning student adopts a trendy, anti-authority stance and spends 
the next twenty years working resentfully to topple the windmills of his imagination. An 
eighteen-year-old decides, arbitrarily, that she wants to retire at fifty-two. She works for 
three decades to make that happen, failing to notice that she made that decision when she 
was little more than a child. What did she know about her fifty-two-year-old self, when 
still a teenager? Even now, many years later, she has only the vaguest, lowest-resolution 
idea of her post-work Eden. She refuses to notice. What did her life mean, if that initial 
goal was wrong? She's afraid of opening Pandora's box, where all the troubles of the 
world reside. But hope is in there, too. Instead, she warps her life to fit the fantasies of a 
sheltered adolescent. 

A naively formulated goal transmutes, with time, into the sinister form of the life-lie. 
One forty-something client told me his vision, formulated by his younger self: "I see 
myself retired, sitting on a tropical beach, drinking margaritas in the sunshine." That's 
not a plan. That's a travel poster. After eight margaritas, you're fit only to await the 
hangover. After three weeks of margarita-filled days, if you have any sense, you're bored 
stiff and self-disgusted. In a year, or less, you're pathetic. It's just not a sustainable 
approach to later life. This kind of oversimplification and falsification is particularly 
typical of ideologues. They adopt a single axiom: government is bad, immigration is bad, 
capitalism is bad, patriarchy is bad. Then they filter and screen their experiences and 
insist ever more narrowly that everything can be explained by that axiom. They believe, 
narcissistically, underneath all that bad theory, that the world could be put right, if only 
they held the controls. 

There is another fundamental problem, too, with the life-lie, particularly when it is 
based on avoidance. A sin of commission occurs when you do something you know to be 
wrong. A sin of omission occurs when you let something bad happen when you could do 
something to stop it. The former is regarded, classically, as more serious than the latter- 
than avoidance. I'm not so sure. 

Consider the person who insists that everything is right in her life. She avoids conflict, 
and smiles, and does what she is asked to do. She finds a niche and hides in it. She does 
not question authority or put her own ideas forward, and does not complain when 
mistreated. She strives for invisibility, like a fish in the centre of a swarming school. But a 
secret unrest gnaws at her heart. She is still suffering, because life is suffering. She is 
lonesome and isolated and unfulfilled. But her obedience and self-obliteration eliminate 
all the meaning from her life. She has become nothing but a slave, a tool for others to 
exploit. She does not get what she wants, or needs, because doing so would mean 
speaking her mind. So, there is nothing of value in her existence to counter-balance life's 
troubles. And that makes her sick. 

It might be the noisy troublemakers who disappear, first, when the institution you 
serve falters and shrinks. But it's the invisible who will be sacrificed next. Someone 
hiding is not someone vital. Vitality requires original contribution. Hiding also does not 
save the conforming and conventional from disease, insanity, death and taxes. And hiding 
from others also means suppressing and hiding the potentialities of the unrealized self. 
And that's the problem. 

If you will not reveal yourself to others, you cannot reveal yourself to yourself. That 
does not only mean that you suppress who you are, although it also means that. It means 
that so much of what you could be will never be forced by necessity to come forward. This 
is a biological truth, as well as a conceptual truth. When you explore boldly, when you 
voluntarily confront the unknown, you gather information and build your renewed self 
out of that information. That is the conceptual element. However, researchers have 
recently discovered that new genes in the central nervous system turn themselves on 


150 



when an organism is placed (or places itself) in a new situation. These genes code for new 
proteins. These proteins are the building blocks for new structures in the brain. This 
means that a lot of you is still nascent, in the most physical of senses, and will not be 
called forth by stasis. You have to say something, go somewhere and do things to get 
turned on. And, if not ... you remain incomplete, and life is too hard for anyone 
incomplete. 

If you say no to your boss, or your spouse, or your mother, when it needs to be said, 
then you transform yourself into someone who can say no when it needs to be said. If you 
say yes when no needs to be said, however, you transform yourself into someone who can 
only say yes, even when it is very clearly time to say no. If you ever wonder how perfectly 
ordinary, decent people could find themselves doing the terrible things the gulag camp 
guards did, you now have your answer. By the time no seriously needed to be said, there 
was no one left capable of saying it. 

If you betray yourself, if you say untrue things, if you act out a lie, you weaken your 
character. If you have a weak character, then adversity will mow you down when it 
appears, as it will, inevitably. You will hide, but there will be no place left to hide. And 
then you will find yourself doing terrible things. 

Only the most cynical, hopeless philosophy insists that reality could be improved 
through falsification. Such a philosophy judges Being and becoming alike, and deems 
them flawed. It denounces truth as insufficient and the honest man as deluded. It is a 
philosophy that both brings about and then justifies the endemic corruption of the world. 

It is not vision as such, and not a plan devised to achieve a vision, that is at fault under 
such circumstances. A vision of the future, the desirable future, is necessary. Such a 
vision links action taken now with important, long-term, foundational values. It lends 
actions in the present significance and importance. It provides a frame limiting 
uncertainty and anxiety. 

It's not vision. It is instead willful blindness. It's the worst sort of lie. It's subtle. It 
avails itself of easy rationalizations. Willful blindness is the refusal to know something 
that could be known. It's refusal to admit that the knocking sound means someone at the 
door. It's refusal to acknowledge the eight-hundred-pound gorilla in the room, the 
elephant under the carpet, the skeleton in the closet. It's refusal to admit to error while 
pursuing the plan. Every game has rules. Some of the most important rules are implicit. 
You accept them merely by deciding to play the game. The first of these rules is that the 
game is important. If it wasn't important, you wouldn't be playing it. Playing a game 
defines it as important. The second is that moves undertaken during the game are valid if 
they help you win. If you make a move and it isn't helping you win, then, by definition, 
it's a bad move. You need to try something different. You remember the old joke: insanity 
is doing the same thing over and over while expecting different results. 

If you're lucky, and you fail, and you try something new, you move ahead. If that 
doesn't work, you try something different again. A minor modification will suffice in 
fortunate circumstances. It is therefore prudent to begin with small changes, and see if 
they help. Sometimes, however, the entire hierarchy of values is faulty, and the whole 
edifice has to be abandoned. The whole game must be changed. That's a revolution, with 
all the chaos and terror of a revolution. It's not something to be engaged in lightly, but 
it's sometimes necessary. Error necessitates sacrifice to correct it, and serious error 
necessitates serious sacrifice. To accept the truth means to sacrifice-and if you have 
rejected the truth for a long time, then you've run up a dangerously large sacrificial debt. 
Forest fires burn out deadwood and return trapped elements to the soil. Sometimes, 
however, fires are suppressed, artificially. That does not stop the deadwood from 
accumulating. Sooner or later, a fire will start. When it does, it will burn so hot that 
everything will be destroyed-even the soil in which the forest grows. 


151 



The prideful, rational mind, comfortable with its certainty, enamoured of its own 
brilliance, is easily tempted to ignore error, and to sweep dirt under the rug. Literary, 
existential philosophers, beginning with S0ren Kierkegaard, conceived of this mode of 
Being as "inauthentic." An inauthentic person continues to perceive and act in ways his 
own experience has demonstrated false. He does not speak with his own voice. 

"Did what I want happen? No. Then my aim or my methods were wrong. I still have 
something to learn." That is the voice of authenticity. 

"Did what I want happen? No. Then the world is unfair. People are jealous, and too 
stupid to understand. It is the fault of something or someone else." That is the voice of 
inauthenticity. It is not too far from there to "they should be stopped" or "they must be 
hurt" or "they must be destroyed." Whenever you hear about something 
incomprehensibly brutal, such ideas have manifested themselves. 

There is no blaming any of this on unconsciousness, either, or repression. When the 
individual lies, he knows it. He may blind himself to the consequences of his actions. He 
may fail to analyze and articulate his past, so that he does not understand. He may even 
forget that he lied and so be unconscious of that fact. But he was conscious, in the 
present, during the commission of each error, and the omission of each responsibility. At 
that moment, he knew what he was up to. And the sins of the inauthentic individual 
compound and corrupt the state. 

Someone power-hungry makes a new rule at your workplace. It's unnecessary. It's 
counterproductive. It's an irritant. It removes some of the pleasure and meaning from 
your work. But you tell yourself it's all right. It's not worth complaining about. Then it 
happens again. You've already trained yourself to allow such things, by failing to react the 
first time. You're a little less courageous. Your opponent, unopposed, is a little bit 
stronger. The institution is a little bit more corrupt. The process of bureaucratic 
stagnation and oppression is underway, and you've contributed, by pretending that it was 
OK. Why not complain? Why not take a stand? If you do, other people, equally afraid to 
speak up, may come to your defence. And if not-maybe it's time for a revolution. Maybe 
you should find a job somewhere else, where your soul is less in danger from corruption. 

For what shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and forfeit his soul? (Mark 
8 : 36 ) 

One of the major contributions of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's masterwork, The Gulag 
Archipelago, was his analysis of the direct causal relationship between the pathology of the 
Soviet prison-work-camp dependent state (where millions suffered and died) and the 
almost universal proclivity of the Soviet citizen to falsify his own day-to-day personal 
experience, deny his own state-induced suffering, and thereby prop up the dictates of the 
rational, ideology-possessed communist system. It was this bad faith, this denial, that in 
Solzhenitsyn's opinion aided and abetted that great paranoid mass-murderer, Joseph 
Stalin, in his crimes. Solzhenitsyn wrote the truth, his truth, hard-learned through his 
own experiences in the camps, exposing the lies of the Soviet state. No educated person 
dared defend that ideology again after Solzhenitsyn published The Gulag Archipelago. No 
one could ever say again, "What Stalin did, that was not true communism." 

Viktor Frankl, the psychiatrist and Nazi concentration camp survivor who wrote the 
classic Man's Search for Meaning, drew a similar social-psychological conclusion: deceitful, 
inauthentic individual existence is the precursor to social totalitarianism. Sigmund Freud, for his 
part, analogously believed that "repression" contributed in a non-trivial manner to the 
development of mental illness (and the difference between repression of truth and a lie is 
a matter of degree, not kind). Alfred Adler knew it was lies that bred sickness. C.G. Jung 
knew that moral problems plagued his patients, and that such problems were caused by 
untruth. All these thinkers, all centrally concerned with pathology both individual and 


152 



cultural, came to the same conclusion: lies warp the structure of Being. Untruth corrupts 
the soul and the state alike, and one form of corruption feeds the other. 

I have repeatedly observed the transformation of mere existential misery into outright 
hell by betrayal and deceit. The barely manageable crisis of a parent's terminal illness can 
be turned, for example, into something awful beyond description by the unseemly and 
petty squabbling of the sufferer's adult children. Obsessed by the unresolved past, they 
gather like ghouls around the deathbed, forcing tragedy into an unholy dalliance with 
cowardice and resentment. 

The inability of a son to thrive independently is exploited by a mother bent on shielding 
her child from all disappointment and pain. He never leaves, and she is never lonely. It's 
an evil conspiracy, forged slowly, as the pathology unfolds, by thousands of knowing 
winks and nods. She plays the martyr, doomed to support her son, and garners 
nourishing sympathy, like a vampire, from supporting friends. He broods in his basement, 
imagining himself oppressed. He fantasizes with delight about the havoc he might wreak 
on the world that rejected him for his cowardice, awkwardness and inability. And 
sometimes he wreaks precisely that havoc. And everyone asks, "Why?" They could know, 
but refuse to. 

Even well-lived lives can, of course, be warped and hurt and twisted by illness and 
infirmity and uncontrollable catastrophe. Depression, bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, 
like cancer, all involve biological factors beyond the individual's immediate control. The 
difficulties intrinsic to life itself are sufficient to weaken and overwhelm each of us, 
pushing us beyond our limits, breaking us at our weakest point. Not even the best-lived 
life provides an absolute defence against vulnerability. But the family that fights in the 
ruins of their earthquake-devastated dwelling place is much less likely to rebuild than the 
family made strong by mutual trust and devotion. Any natural weakness or existential 
challenge, no matter how minor, can be magnified into a serious crisis with enough deceit 
in the individual, family or culture. 

The honest human spirit may continually fail in its attempts to bring about Paradise on 
Earth. It may manage, however, to reduce the suffering attendant on existence to bearable 
levels. The tragedy of Being is the consequence of our limitations and the vulnerability 
defining human experience. It may even be the price we pay for Being itself-since 
existence must be limited, to be at all. 

I have seen a husband adapt honestly and courageously while his wife descended into 
terminal dementia. He made the necessary adjustments, step by step. He accepted help 
when he needed it. He refused to deny her sad deterioration and in that manner adapted 
gracefully to it. I saw the family of that same woman come together in a supporting and 
sustaining manner as she lay dying, and gain newfound connections with each other- 
brother, sisters, grandchildren and father-as partial but genuine compensation for their 
loss. I have seen my teenage daughter live through the destruction of her hip and her 
ankle and survive two years of continual, intense pain and emerge with her spirit intact. I 
watched her younger brother voluntarily and without resentment sacrifice many 
opportunities for friendship and social engagement to stand by her and us while she 
suffered. With love, encouragement, and character intact, a human being can be resilient 
beyond imagining. What cannot be borne, however, is the absolute ruin produced by 
tragedy and deception. 

The capacity of the rational mind to deceive, manipulate, scheme, trick, falsify, 
minimize, mislead, betray, prevaricate, deny, omit, rationalize, bias, exaggerate and 
obscure is so endless, so remarkable, that centuries of pre-scientific thought, 
concentrating on clarifying the nature of moral endeavour, regarded it as positively 
demonic. This is not because of rationality itself, as a process. That process can produce 


153 



clarity and progress. It is because rationality is subject to the single worst temptation-to 
raise what it knows now to the status of an absolute. 

We can turn to the great poet John Milton, once again, to clarify just what this means. 
Over thousands of years of history, the Western world wrapped a dream-like fantasy 
about the nature of evil around its central religious core. That fantasy had a protagonist, 
an adversarial personality, absolutely dedicated to the corruption of Being. Milton took it 
upon himself to organize, dramatize and articulate the essence of this collective dream, 
and gave it life, in the figure of Satan-Lucifer, the "light bearer." He writes of Lucifer's 
primal temptation, and its immediate consequences:- 

He trusted to have equaled the most High, 

If he opposed; and with ambitious aim 
Against the Throne and Monarchy of God 
Raised impious War in Heaven and Battel proud 
With vain attempt. Him the Almighty Power 
Hurled headlong flaming from the Ethereal Sky 
With hideous ruin and combustion down 
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell 
In Adamantine Chains and penal Fire ... 

Lucifer, in Milton's eyes-the spirit of reason-was the most wondrous angel brought 
forth from the void by God. This can be read psychologically. Reason is something alive. It 
lives in all of us. It's older than any of us. It's best understood as a personality, not a 
faculty. It has its aims, and its temptations, and its weaknesses. It flies higher and sees 
farther than any other spirit. But reason falls in love with itself, and worse. It falls in love 
with its own productions. It elevates them, and worships them as absolutes. Lucifer is, 
therefore, the spirit of totalitarianism. He is flung from Heaven into Hell because such 
elevation, such rebellion against the Highest and Incomprehensible, inevitably produces 
Hell. 

To say it again: it is the greatest temptation of the rational faculty to glorify its own 
capacity and its own productions and to claim that in the face of its theories nothing 
transcendent or outside its domain need exist. This means that all important facts have 
been discovered. This means that nothing important remains unknown. But most 
importantly, it means denial of the necessity for courageous individual confrontation with 
Being. What is going to save you? The totalitarian says, in essence, "You must rely on 
faith in what you already know." But that is not what saves. What saves is the willingness to 
learn from what you don't know. That is faith in the possibility of human transformation. 
That is faith in the sacrifice of the current self for the self that could be. The totalitarian 
denies the necessity for the individual to take ultimate responsibility for Being. 

That denial is the meaning of rebellion against "the most High." That is what 
totalitarian means: Everything that needs to be discovered has been discovered. Everything 
will unfold precisely as planned. All problems will vanish, forever, once the perfect system 
is accepted. Milton's great poem was a prophecy. As rationality rose ascendant from the 
ashes of Christianity, the great threat of total systems accompanied it. Communism, in 
particular, was attractive not so much to oppressed workers, its hypothetical beneficiaries, 
but to intellectuals-to those whose arrogant pride in intellect assured them they were 
always right. But the promised utopia never emerged. Instead humanity experienced the 
inferno of Stalinist Russia and Mao's China and Pol Pot's Cambodia, and the citizens of 
those states were required to betray their own experience, turn against their fellow 
citizens, and die in the tens of millions. 

There is an old Soviet joke. An American dies and goes to hell. Satan himself shows 
him around. They pass a large cauldron. The American peers in. It's full of suffering souls, 
burning in hot pitch. As they struggle to leave the pot, low-ranking devils, sitting on the 
rim, pitchfork them back in. The American is properly shocked. Satan says, "That's where 
we put sinful Englishmen." The tour continues. Soon the duo approaches a second 


154 


cauldron. It's slightly larger, and slightly hotter. The American peers in. It is also full of 
suffering souls, all wearing berets. Devils are pitchforking would-be escapees back into 
this cauldron, as well. "That's where we put sinful Frenchmen," Satan says. In the 
distance is a third cauldron. It's much bigger, and is glowing, white hot. The American 
can barely get near it. Nonetheless, at Satan's insistence, he approaches it and peers in. It 
is absolutely packed with souls, barely visible, under the surface of the boiling liquid. 
Now and then, however, one clambers out of the pitch and desperately reaches for the 
rim. Oddly, there are no devils sitting on the edge of this giant pot, but the clamberer 
disappears back under the surface anyway. The American asks, "Why are there no 
demons here to keep everyone from escaping?" Satan replies, "This is where we put the 
Russians. If one tries to escape, the others pull him back in." 

Milton believed that stubborn refusal to change in the face of error not only meant 
ejection from heaven, and subsequent degeneration into an ever-deepening hell, but the 
rejection of redemption itself. Satan knows full well that even if he was willing to seek 
reconciliation, and God willing to grant it, he would only rebel again, because he will not 
change. Perhaps it is this prideful stubbornness that constitutes the mysterious 
unforgivable sin against the Holy Ghost: 

... Farewell happy Fields 
Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail horrors, hail 
Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell 
Receive thy new Possessor: One who brings 

A mind not to be changed by Place or Time. 

This is no afterlife fantasy. This is no perverse realm of post-existence torture for political 
enemies. This is an abstract idea, and abstractions are often more real than what they 
represent. The idea that hell exists in some metaphysical manner is not only ancient, and 
pervasive; it's true. Hell is eternal. It has always existed. It exists now. It's the most 
barren, hopeless and malevolent subdivision of the underworld of chaos, where 
disappointed and resentful people forever dwell. 

The mind is its own place, and in itself 
Can make a Heav'n of Hell, a Hell of Heav'n. 

Here we may reign secure, and in my choice 
To reign is worth ambition though in Hell: 

Better to reign in Hell, than serve in Heav'n. 

Those who have lied enough, in word and action, live there, in hell-now. Take a walk 
down any busy urban street. Keep your eyes open and pay attention. You will see people 
who are there, now. These are the people to whom you instinctively give a wide berth. 
These are the people who are immediately angered if you direct your gaze toward them, 
although sometimes they will instead turn away in shame. I saw a horribly damaged 
street alcoholic do exactly that in the presence of my young daughter. He wanted above 
all to avoid seeing his degraded state incontrovertibly reflected in her eyes. 

It is deceit that makes people miserable beyond what they can bear. It is deceit that fills 
human souls with resentment and vengefulness. It is deceit that produces the terrible 
suffering of mankind: the death camps of the Nazis; the torture chambers and genocides 
of Stalin and that even greater monster, Mao. It was deceit that killed hundreds of 
millions of people in the twentieth century. It was deceit that almost doomed civilization 
itself. It is deceit that still threatens us, most profoundly, today. 

The Truth, Instead 

What happens if, instead, we decide to stop lying? What does this even mean? We are 
limited in our knowledge, after all. We must make decisions, here and now, even though 


155 


the best means and the best goals can never be discerned with certainty. An aim, an 
ambition, provides the structure necessary for action. An aim provides a destination, a 
point of contrast against the present, and a framework, within which all things can be 
evaluated. An aim defines progress and makes such progress exciting. An aim reduces 
anxiety, because if you have no aim everything can mean anything or nothing, and neither 
of those two options makes for a tranquil spirit. Thus, we have to think, and plan, and 
limit, and posit, in order to live at all. How then to envision the future, and establish our 
direction, without falling prey to the temptation of totalitarian certainty? 

Some reliance on tradition can help us establish our aims. It is reasonable to do what 
other people have always done, unless we have a very good reason not to. It is reasonable 
to become educated and work and find love and have a family. That is how culture 
maintains itself. But it is necessary to aim at your target, however traditional, with your 
eyes wide open. You have a direction, but it might be wrong. You have a plan, but it 
might be ill-formed. You may have been led astray by your own ignorance-and, worse, 
by your own unrevealed corruption. You must make friends, therefore, with what you 
don't know, instead of what you know. You must remain awake to catch yourself in the 
act. You must remove the beam in your own eye, before you concern yourself with the 
mote in your brother's. And in this way, you strengthen your own spirit, so it can tolerate 
the burden of existence, and you rejuvenate the state. 

The ancient Egyptians had already figured this out thousands of years ago, although 
their knowledge remained embodied in dramatic form. They worshipped Osiris, 
mythological founder of the state and the god of tradition. Osiris, however, was 
vulnerable to overthrow and banishment to the underworld by Set, his evil, scheming 
brother. The Egyptians represented in story the fact that social organizations ossify with 
time, and tend towards willful blindness. Osiris would not see his brother's true 
character, even though he could have. Set waits and, at an opportune moment, attacks. 
He hacks Osiris into pieces, and scatters the divine remains through the kingdom. He 
sends his brother's spirit to the underworld. He makes it very difficult for Osiris to pull 
himself back together. 

Fortunately, the great king did not have to deal with Set on his own. The Egyptians also 
worshipped Horus, the son of Osiris. Horus took the twin forms of a falcon, the most 
visually acute of all creatures, and the still-famous hieroglyphic single Egyptian eye (as 
alluded to in Rule 7). Osiris is tradition, aged and willfully blind. Horus, his son, could 
and would, by contrast, see. Horus was the god of attention. That is not the same as 
rationality. Because he paid attention, Horus could perceive and triumph against the evils 
of Set, his uncle, albeit at great cost. When Horus confronts Set, they have a terrible 
battle. Before Set's defeat and banishment from the kingdom, he tears out one of his 
nephew's eyes. But the eventually victorious Horus takes back the eye. Then he does 
something truly unexpected: he journeys voluntarily to the underworld and gives the eye to his 
father. 

What does this mean? First, that the encounter with malevolence and evil is of 
sufficient terror to damage even the vision of a god; second, that the attentive son can restore 
the vision of his father. Culture is always in a near-dead state, even though it was 
established by the spirit of great people in the past. But the present is not the past. The 
wisdom of the past thus deteriorates, or becomes outdated, in proportion to the genuine 
difference between the conditions of the present and the past. That is a mere consequence 
of the passage of time, and the change that passage inevitably brings. But it is also the 
case that culture and its wisdom is additionally vulnerable to corruption-to voluntary, 
willful blindness and Mephistophelean intrigue. Thus, the inevitable functional decline of 
the institutions granted to us by our ancestors is sped along by our misbehavior-our 
missing of the mark-in the present. 


156 


It is our responsibility to see what is before our eyes, courageously, and to learn from it, 
even if it seems horrible-even if the horror of seeing it damages our consciousness, and 
half-blinds us. The act of seeing is particularly important when it challenges what we 
know and rely on, upsetting and destabilizing us. It is the act of seeing that informs the 
individual and updates the state. It was for this reason that Nietzsche said that a man's 
worth was determined by how much truth he could tolerate. You are by no means only 
what you already know. You are also all that which you could know, if you only would. 
Thus, you should never sacrifice what you could be for what you are. You should never 
give up the better that resides within for the security you already have-and certainly not 
when you have already caught a glimpse, an undeniable glimpse, of something beyond. 

In the Christian tradition, Christ is identified with the Logos. The Logos is the Word of 
God. That Word transformed chaos into order at the beginning of time. In His human 
form, Christ sacrificed himself voluntarily to the truth, to the good, to God. In 
consequence, He died and was reborn. The Word that produces order from Chaos 
sacrifices everything, even itself, to God. That single sentence, wise beyond 
comprehension, sums up Christianity. Every bit of learning is a little death. Every bit of 
new information challenges a previous conception, forcing it to dissolve into chaos before 
it can be reborn as something better. Sometimes such deaths virtually destroy us. In such 
cases, we might never recover or, if we do, we change a lot. A good friend of mine 
discovered that his wife of decades was having an affair. He didn't see it coming. It 
plunged him into a deep depression. He descended into the underworld. He told me, at 
one point, "I always thought that people who were depressed should just shake it off. I 
didn't have any idea what I was talking about." Eventually, he returned from the depths. 
In many ways, he's a new man-and, perhaps, a wiser and better man. He lost forty 
pounds. He ran a marathon. He travelled to Africa and climbed Mount Kilimanjaro. He 
chose rebirth over descent into Hell. 

Set your ambitions, even if you are uncertain about what they should be. The better 
ambitions have to do with the development of character and ability, rather than status 
and power. Status you can lose. You carry character with you wherever you go, and it 
allows you to prevail against adversity. Knowing this, tie a rope to a boulder. Pick up the 
great stone, heave it in front of you, and pull yourself towards it. Watch and observe 
while you move forward. Articulate your experience as clearly and carefully to yourself 
and others as you possibly can. In this manner, you will learn to proceed more effectively 
and efficiently towards your goal. And, while you are doing this, do not lie. Especially to 
yourself. 

If you pay attention to what you do and say, you can learn to feel a state of internal 
division and weakness when you are misbehaving and misspeaking. It's an embodied 
sensation, not a thought. I experience an internal sensation of sinking and division, rather 
than solidity and strength, when I am incautious with my acts and words. It seems to be 
centred in my solar plexus, where a large knot of nervous tissue resides. I learned to 
recognize when I was lying, in fact, by noticing this sinking and division, and then 
inferring the presence of a lie. It often took me a long time to ferret out the deception. 
Sometimes I was using words for appearance. Sometimes I was trying to disguise my own 
true ignorance of the topic at hand. Sometimes I was using the words of others to avoid 
the responsibility of thinking for myself. 

If you pay attention, when you are seeking something, you will move towards your 
goal. More importantly, however, you will acquire the information that allows your goal 
itself to transform. A totalitarian never asks, "What if my current ambition is in error?" 
He treats it, instead, as the Absolute. It becomes his God, for all intents and purposes. It 
constitutes his highest value. It regulates his emotions and motivational states, and 


157 



determines his thoughts. All people serve their ambition. In that matter, there are no 
atheists. There are only people who know, and don't know, what God they serve. 

If you bend everything totally, blindly and willfully towards the attainment of a goal, 
and only that goal, you will never be able to discover if another goal would serve you, and 
the world, better. It is this that you sacrifice if you do not tell the truth. If, instead, you 
tell the truth, your values transform as you progress. If you allow yourself to be informed 
by the reality manifesting itself, as you struggle forward, your notions of what is 
important will change. You will reorient yourself, sometimes gradually, and sometimes 
suddenly and radically. 

Imagine: you go to engineering school, because that is what your parents desire-but it 
is not what you want. Working at cross-purposes to your own wishes, you will find 
yourself unmotivated, and failing. You will struggle to concentrate and discipline yourself, 
but it will not work. Your soul will reject the tyranny of your will (how else could that be 
said?). Why are you complying? You may not want to disappoint your parents (although 
if you fail you will do exactly that). You may lack the courage for the conflict necessary to 
free yourself. You may not want to sacrifice your childish belief in parental omniscience, 
wishing devoutly to continue believing that there is someone who knows you better than 
you know yourself, and who also knows all about the world. You want to be shielded in 
this manner from the stark existential aloneness of individual Being and its attendant 
responsibility. This is all very common and understandable. But you suffer because you 
are truly not meant to be an engineer. 

One day you have had enough. You drop out. You disappoint your parents. You learn to 
live with that. You consult only yourself, even though that means you must rely on your 
own decisions. You take a philosophy degree. You accept the burden of your own 
mistakes. You become your own person. By rejecting your father's vision, you develop 
your own. And then, as your parents age, you've become adult enough to be there for 
them, when they come to need you. They win, too. But both victories had to be purchased 
at the cost of the conflict engendered by your truth. As Matthew 10:34 has it, citing 
Christ-emphasizing the role of the spoken Truth: "Think not that I have come to send 
peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword." 

As you continue to live in accordance with the truth, as it reveals itself to you, you will 
have to accept and deal with the conflicts that mode of Being will generate. If you do so, 
you will continue to mature and become more responsible, in small ways (don't 
underestimate their importance) and in large. You will ever more closely approach your 
newer and more wisely formulated goals, and become even wiser in their formulation, 
when you discover and rectify your inevitable errors. Your conception of what is 
important will become more and more appropriate, as you incorporate the wisdom of 
your experience. You will quit wildly oscillating and walk ever more directly towards the 
good-a good you could never have comprehended if you had insisted despite all evidence 
that you were right, absolutely right, at the beginning. 

If existence is good, then the clearest and cleanest and most correct relationship with it 
is also good. If existence is not good, by contrast, you're lost. Nothing will save you- 
certainly not the petty rebellions, murky thinking and obscurantist blindness that 
constitute deceit. Is existence good? You have to take a terrible risk to find out. Live in 
truth, or live in deceit, face the consequences, and draw your conclusions. 

This is the "act of faith" whose necessity was insisted upon by the Danish philosopher 
Kierkegaard. You cannot know ahead of time. Even a good example is insufficient for 
proof, given the differences between individuals. The success of a good example can 
always be attributed to luck. Thus, you have to risk your particular, individual life to find 
out. It is this risk that the ancients described as the sacrifice of personal will to the will of 
God. It is not an act of submission (at least as submission is currently understood). It is 


158 



an act of courage. It is faith that the wind will blow your ship to a new and better port. It 
is the faith that Being can be corrected by becoming. It is the spirit of exploration itself. 

Perhaps it is better to conceptualize it this way: Everyone needs a concrete, specific goal 
-an ambition, and a purpose-to limit chaos and make intelligible sense of his or her 
life. But all such concrete goals can and should be subordinated to what might be 
considered a meta-goal, which is a way of approaching and formulating goals themselves. 
The meta-goal could be "live in truth." This means, "Act diligently towards some well- 
articulated, defined and temporary end. Make your criteria for failure and success timely 
and clear, at least for yourself (and even better if others can understand what you are 
doing and evaluate it with you). While doing so, however, allow the world and your spirit 
to unfold as they will, while you act out and articulate the truth." This is both pragmatic 
ambition and the most courageous of faiths. 

Life is suffering. The Buddha stated that, explicitly. Christians portray the same 
sentiment imagistically, with the divine crucifix. The Jewish faith is saturated with its 
remembrance. The equivalence of life and limitation is the primary and unavoidable fact 
of existence. The vulnerability of our Being renders us susceptible to the pains of social 
judgement and contempt and the inevitable breakdown of our bodies. But even all those 
ways of suffering, terrible as they are, are not sufficient to corrupt the world, to transform 
it into Hell, the way the Nazis and the Maoists and the Stalinists corrupted the world and 
turned it into Hell. For that, as Hitler stated so clearly, you need the lie: 

[I]n the big lie there is always a certain force of credibility; because the broad masses of a nation are always 
more easily corrupted in the deeper strata of their emotional nature than consciously or voluntarily; and thus in 
the primitive simplicity of their minds they more readily fall victims to the big lie than the small lie, since they 
themselves often tell small lies in little matters but would be ashamed to resort to large-scale falsehoods. It 
would never come into their heads to fabricate colossal untruths, and they would not believe that others could 
have the impudence to distort the truth so infamously. Even though the facts which prove this to be so may be 
brought clearly to their minds, they will still doubt and waver and will continue to think that there may be some 
other explanation. 

For the big lie, you first need the little lie. The little lie is, metaphorically speaking, the 
bait used by the Father of Lies to hook his victims. The human capacity for imagination 
makes us capable of dreaming up and creating alternative worlds. This is the ultimate 
source of our creativity. With that singular capacity, however, comes the counterpart, the 
opposite side of the coin: we can deceive ourselves and others into believing and acting as 
if things are other than we know they are. 

And why not he? Why not twist and distort things to obtain a small gain, or to smooth 
things over, or to keep the peace, or to avoid hurt feelings? Reality has its terrible aspect: 
do we really need to confront its snake-headed face in every moment of our waking 
consciousness, and at every turn in our lives? Why not turn away, at least, when looking 
is simply too painful? 

The reason is simple. Things fall apart. What worked yesterday will not necessarily work 
today. We have inherited the great machinery of state and culture from our forefathers, 
but they are dead, and cannot deal with the changes of the day. The living can. We can 
open our eyes and modify what we have where necessary and keep the machinery running 
smoothly. Or we can pretend that everything is alright, fail to make the necessary repairs, 
and then curse fate when nothing goes our way. 

Things fall apart: this is one of the great discoveries of humanity. And we speed the 
natural deterioration of great things through blindness, inaction and deceit. Without 
attention, culture degenerates and dies, and evil prevails. 

What you see of a lie when you act it out (and most lies are acted out, rather than told) 
is very little of what it actually is. A lie is connected to everything else. It produces the 
same effect on the world that a single drop of sewage produces in even the largest crystal 
magnum of champagne. It is something best considered live and growing. 


159 


When the lies get big enough, the whole world spoils. But if you look close enough, the 
biggest of lies is composed of smaller lies, and those are composed of still smaller lies- 
and the smallest of lies is where the big lie starts. It is not the mere misstatement of fact. 
It is instead an act that has the aspect of the most serious conspiracy ever to possess the 
race of man. Its seeming innocuousness, its trivial meanness, the feeble arrogance that 
gives rise to it, the apparently trivial circumventing of responsibility that it aims at-these 
all work effectively to camouflage its true nature, its genuine dangerousness, and its 
equivalence with the great acts of evil that man perpetrates and often enjoys. Lies corrupt 
the world. Worse, that is their intent. 

First, a little lie; then, several little lies to prop it up. After that, distorted thinking to 
avoid the shame that those lies produce, then a few more lies to cover up the 
consequences of the distorted thinking. Then, most terribly, the transformation of those 
now necessary lies through practice into automatized, specialized, structural, 
neurologically instantiated "unconscious" belief and action. Then the sickening of 
experience itself as action predicated on falsehood fails to produce the results intended. If 
you don't believe in brick walls, you will still be injured when you run headlong into one. 
Then you will curse reality itself for producing the wall. 

After that comes the arrogance and sense of superiority that inevitably accompanies the 
production of successful lies ( hypothetically successful lies-and that is one of the greatest 
dangers: apparently everyone is fooled, so everyone is stupid, except me. Everyone is 
stupid and fooled, by me-so I can get away with whatever I want). Finally, there is the 
proposition: "Being itself is susceptible to my manipulations. Thus, it deserves no 
respect." 

That's things falling apart, like Osiris, severed into pieces. That's the structure of the 
person or the state disintegrating under the influence of a malign force. That's the chaos 
of the underworld emerging, like a flood, to subsume familiar ground. But it's not yet 
Hell. 

Hell comes later. Hell comes when lies have destroyed the relationship between 
individual or state and reality itself. Things fall apart. Life degenerates. Everything 
becomes frustration and disappointment. Hope consistently betrays. The deceitful 
individual desperately gestures at sacrifice, like Cain, but fails to please God. Then the 
drama enters its final act. 

Tortured by constant failure, the individual becomes bitter. Disappointment and failure 
amalgamate, and produce a fantasy: the world is bent on my personal suffering, my particular 
undoing, my destruction. I need, I deserve, I must have-my revenge. That's the gateway to 
Hell. That's when the underworld, a terrifying and unfamiliar place, becomes misery 
itself. 

At the beginning of time, according to the great Western tradition, the Word of God 
transformed chaos into Being through the act of speech. It is axiomatic, within that 
tradition, that man and woman alike are made in the image of that God. We also 
transform chaos into Being, through speech. We transform the manifold possibilities of 
the future into the actualities of past and present. 

To tell the truth is to bring the most habitable reality into Being. Truth builds edifices 
that can stand a thousand years. Truth feeds and clothes the poor, and makes nations 
wealthy and safe. Truth reduces the terrible complexity of a man to the simplicity of his 
word, so that he can become a partner, rather than an enemy. Truth makes the past truly 
past, and makes the best use of the future's possibilities. Truth is the ultimate, 
inexhaustible natural resource. It's the light in the darkness. 

See the truth. Tell the truth. 

Truth will not come in the guise of opinions shared by others, as the truth is neither a 
collection of slogans nor an ideology. It will instead be personal. Your truth is something 


160 



only you can tell, based as it is on the unique circumstances of your life. Apprehend your 
personal truth. Communicate it carefully, in an articulate manner, to yourself and others. 
This will ensure your security and your life more abundantly now, while you inhabit the 
structure of your current beliefs. This will ensure the benevolence of the future, diverging 
as it might from the certainties of the past. 

The truth springs forth ever anew from the most profound wellsprings of Being. It will 
keep your soul from withering and dying while you encounter the inevitable tragedy of 
life. It will help you avoid the terrible desire to seek vengeance for that tragedy-part of 
the terrible sin of Being, which everything must bear gracefully, just so it can exist. 

If your life is not what it could be, try telling the truth. If you cling desperately to an 
ideology, or wallow in nihilism, try telling the truth. If you feel weak and rejected, and 
desperate, and confused, try telling the truth. In Paradise, everyone speaks the truth. That 
is what makes it Paradise. 

Tell the truth. Or, at least, don't lie. 


161 



/** 

VS 


162 





163 

















a 


164 


RULE 9 


ASSUME THAT THE PERSON YOU ARE LISTENING TO MIGHT 
KNOW SOMETHING YOU DON'T 


NOT ADVICE 

Psychotherapy is not advice. Advice is what you get when the person you're talking with 
about something horrible and complicated wishes you would just shut up and go away. 
Advice is what you get when the person you are talking to wants to revel in the 
superiority of his or her own intelligence. If you weren't so stupid, after all, you wouldn't 
have your stupid problems. 

Psychotherapy is genuine conversation. Genuine conversation is exploration, 
articulation and strategizing. When you're involved in a genuine conversation, you're 
listening, and talking-but mostly listening. Listening is paying attention. It's amazing 
what people will tell you if you listen. Sometimes if you listen to people they will even tell 
you what's wrong with them. Sometimes they will even tell you how they plan to fix it. 
Sometimes that helps you fix something wrong with yourself. One surprising time (and 
this is only one occasion of many when such things happened), I was listening to 
someone very carefully, and she told me within minutes (a) that she was a witch and (b) 
that her witch coven spent a lot of its time visualizing world peace together. She was a 
long-time lower-level functionary in some bureaucratic job. I would never have guessed 
that she was a witch. I also didn't know that witch covens spent any of their time 
visualizing world peace. I didn't know what to make of any of it, either, but it wasn't 
boring, and that's something. 

In my clinical practice, I talk and I listen. I talk more to some people, and listen more to 
others. Many of the people I listen to have no one else to talk to. Some of them are truly 
alone in the world. There are far more people like that than you think. You don't meet 
them, because they are alone. Others are surrounded by tyrants or narcissists or drunks 
or traumatized people or professional victims. Some are not good at articulating 
themselves. They go off on tangents. They repeat themselves. They say vague and 
contradictory things. They're hard to listen to. Others have terrible things happening 
around them. They have parents with Alzheimer's or sick children. There's not much time 
left over for their personal concerns. 

One time a client who I had been seeing for a few months came into my office for 
her scheduled appointment and, after some brief preliminaries, she announced "I think I 
was raped." It is not easy to know how to respond to a statement like that, although there 
is frequently some mystery around such events. Often alcohol is involved, as it is in most 
sexual assault cases. Alcohol can cause ambiguity. That's partly why people drink. 
Alcohol temporarily lifts the terrible burden of self-consciousness from people. Drunk 
people know about the future, but they don't care about it. That's exciting. That's 
exhilarating. Drunk people can party like there's no tomorrow. But, because there is a 
tomorrow-most of the time-drunk people also get in trouble. They black out. They go 
to dangerous places with careless people. They have fun. But they also get raped. So, I 
immediately thought something like that might be involved. How else to understand "I 
think"? But that wasn't the end of the story. She added an extra detail: "Five times." The 
first sentence was awful enough, but the second produced something unfathomable. Five 
times? What could that possibly mean? 


165 


My client told me that she would go to a bar and have a few drinks. Someone would 
start to talk with her. She would end up at his place or her place with him. The evening 
would proceed, inevitably, to its sexual climax. The next day she would wake up, 
uncertain about what happened-uncertain about her motives, uncertain about his 
motives, and uncertain about the world. Miss S, we'll call her, was vague to the point of 
non-existence. She was a ghost of a person. She dressed, however, like a professional. She 
knew how to present herself, for first appearances. In consequence, she had finagled her 
way onto a government advisory board considering the construction of a major piece of 
transportation infrastructure (even though she knew nothing about government, advising 
or construction). She also hosted a local public-access radio show dedicated to small 
business, even though she had never held a real job, and knew nothing about being an 
entrepreneur. She had been receiving welfare payments for the entirety of her adulthood. 

Her parents had never provided her with a minute of attention. She had four brothers 
and they were not at all good to her. She had no friends now, and none in the past. She 
had no partner. She had no one to talk to, and she didn't know how to think on her own 
(that's not rare). She had no self. She was, instead, a walking cacophony of unintegrated 
experiences. I had tried previously to help her find a job. I asked her if she had a CV. She 
said yes. I asked her to bring it to me. She brought it to our next session. It was fifty 
pages long. It was in a file folder box, divided into sections, with manila tag separators- 
the ones with the little colorful index-markers on the sides. The sections included such 
topics as "My Dreams" and "Books I Have Read." She had written down dozens of her 
night-time dreams in the "My Dreams" section, and provided brief summaries and 
reviews of her reading material. This was what she proposed to send to prospective 
employers (or perhaps already had: who really knew?). It is impossible to understand how 
much someone has to be no one at all to exist in a world where a file folder box 
containing fifty indexed pages listing dreams and novels constitutes a CV. Miss S knew 
nothing about herself. She knew nothing about other individuals. She knew nothing 
about the world. She was a movie played out of focus. And she was desperately waiting 
for a story about herself to make it all make sense. 

If you add some sugar to cold water, and stir it, the sugar will dissolve. If you heat up 
that water, you can dissolve more. If you heat the water to boiling, you can add a lot more 
sugar and get that to dissolve too. Then, if you take that boiling sugar water, and slowly 
cool it, and don't bump it or jar it, you can trick it (I don't know how else to phrase this) 
into holding a lot more dissolved sugar than it would have it if it had remained cold all 
along. That's called a super-saturated solution. If you drop a single crystal of sugar into 
that super-saturated solution, all the excess sugar will suddenly and dramatically 
crystallize. It's as if it were crying out for order. That was my client. People like her are 
the reason that the many forms of psychotherapy currently practised all work. People can 
be so confused that their psyches will be ordered and their lives improved by the adoption 
of any reasonably orderly system of interpretation. This is the bringing together of the 
disparate elements of their lives in a disciplined manner-any disciplined manner. So, if 
you have come apart at the seams (or if you never have been together at all) you can 
restructure your life on Freudian, Jungian, Adlerian, Rogerian or behavioural principles. 
At least then you make sense. At least then you're coherent. At least then you might be 
good for something, if not good yet for everything. You can't fix a car with an axe, but you 
can cut down a tree. That's still something. 

At about the same time I was seeing this client, the media was all afire with stories of 
recovered memories-particularly of sexual assault. The dispute raged apace: were these 
genuine accounts of past trauma? Or were they post-hoc constructs, dreamed up as a 
consequence of pressure wittingly or unwittingly applied by incautious therapists, 
grasped onto desperately by clinical clients all-too-eager to find a simple cause for all their 


166 



trouble? Sometimes, it was the former, perhaps; and sometimes the latter. I understood 
much more clearly and precisely, however, how easy it might be to instill a false memory 
into the mental landscape as soon as my client revealed her uncertainty about her sexual 
experiences. The past appears fixed, but it's not-not in an important psychological 
sense. There is an awful lot to the past, after all, and the way we organize it can be subject 
to drastic revision. 

Imagine, for example, a movie where nothing but terrible things happen. But, in the 
end, everything works out. Everything is resolved. A sufficiently happy ending can change 
the meaning of all the previous events. They can all be viewed as worthwhile, given that 
ending. Now imagine another movie. A lot of things are happening. They're all exciting 
and interesting. But there are a lot of them. Ninety minutes in, you start to worry. "This 
is a great movie," you think, "but there are a lot of things going on. I sure hope the 
filmmaker can pull it all together." But that doesn't happen. Instead, the story ends, 
abruptly, unresolved, or something facile and cliched occurs. You leave deeply annoyed 
and unsatisfied-failing to notice that you were fully engaged and enjoying the movie 
almost the whole time you were in the theatre. The present can change the past, and the 
future can change the present. 

When you are remembering the past, as well, you remember some parts of it and forget 
others. You have clear memories of some things that happened, but not others, of 
potentially equal import-just as in the present you are aware of some aspects of your 
surroundings and unconscious of others. You categorize your experience, grouping some 
elements together, and separating them from the rest. There is a mysterious arbitrariness 
about all of this. You don't form a comprehensive, objective record. You can't. You just 
don't know enough. You just can't perceive enough. You're not objective, either. You're 
alive. You're subjective. You have vested interests-at least in yourself, at least usually. 
What exactly should be included in the story? Where exactly is the border between 
events? 

The sexual abuse of children is distressingly common. However, it's not as common 
as poorly trained psychotherapists think, and it also does not always produce terribly 
damaged adults.- People vary in their resilience. An event that will wipe one person out 
can be shrugged off by another. But therapists with a little second-hand knowledge of 
Freud often axiomatically assume that a distressed adult in their practice must have been 
subject to childhood sexual abuse. Why else would they be distressed? So, they dig, and 
infer, and intimate, and suggest, and overreact, and bias and tilt. They exaggerate the 
importance of some events, and downplay the importance of others. They trim the facts to 
fit their theory. And they convince their clients that they were sexually abused-if they 
could only remember. And then the clients start to remember. And then they start to 
accuse. And sometimes what they remember never happened, and the people accused are 
innocent. The good news? At least the therapist's theory remains intact. That's good-for 
the therapist. But there's no shortage of collateral damage. However, people are often 
willing to produce a lot of collateral damage if they can retain their theory. 

I knew about all this when Miss S came to talk to me about her sexual experiences. 
When she recounted her trips to the singles bars, and their recurring aftermath, I thought 
a bunch of things at once. I thought, "You're so vague and so non-existent. You're a 
denizen of chaos and the underworld. You are going ten different places at the same time. 
Anyone can take you by the hand and guide you down the road of their choosing." After 
all, if you're not the leading man in your own drama, you're a bit player in someone else's 
-and you might well be assigned to play a dismal, lonely and tragic part. After Miss S 
recounted her story, we sat there. I thought, "You have normal sexual desires. You're 
extremely lonely. You're unfulfilled sexually. You're afraid of men and ignorant of the 


167 


world and know nothing of yourself. You wander around like an accident waiting to 
happen and the accident happens and that's your life." 

I thought, "Part of you wants to be taken. Part of you wants to be a child. You were 
abused by your brothers and ignored by your father and so part of you wants revenge 
upon men. Part of you is guilty. Another part is ashamed. Another part is thrilled and 
excited. Who are you? What did you do? What happened?" What was the objective truth? 
There was no way of knowing the objective truth. And there never would be. There was 
no objective observer, and there never would be. There was no complete and accurate 
story. Such a thing did not and could not exist. There were, and are, only partial accounts 
and fragmentary viewpoints. But some are still better than others. Memory is not a 
description of the objective past. Memory is a tool. Memory is the past's guide to the future. 
If you remember that something bad happened, and you can figure out why, then you can 
try to avoid that bad thing happening again. That's the purpose of memory. It's not "to 
remember the past." It's to stop the same damn thing from happening over and over. 

I thought, "I could simplify Miss S's life. I could say that her suspicions of rape were 
fully justified, and that her doubt about the events was nothing but additional evidence of 
her thorough and long-term victimization. I could insist that her sexual partners had a 
legal obligation to ensure that she was not too impaired by alcohol to give consent. I 
could tell her that she had indisputably been subject to violent and illicit acts, unless she 
had consented to each sexual move explicitly and verbally. I could tell her that she was an 
innocent victim." I could have told her all that. And it would have been true. And she 
would have accepted it as true, and remembered it for the rest of her life. She would have 
been a new person, with a new history, and a new destiny. 

But I also thought, "I could tell Miss S that she is a walking disaster. I could tell her 
that she wanders into a bar like a courtesan in a coma, that she is a danger to herself and 
others, that she needs to wake up, and that if she goes to singles bars and drinks too 
much and is taken home and has rough violent sex (or even tender caring sex), then what 
the hell does she expect?" In other words, I could have told her, in more philosophical 
terms, that she was Nietzsche's "pale criminal"-the person who at one moment dares to 
break the sacred law and at the next shrinks from paying the price. And that would have 
been true, too, and she would have accepted it as such, and remembered it. 

If I had been the adherent of a left-wing, social-justice ideology, I would have told her 
the first story. If I had been the adherent of a conservative ideology, I would have told her 
the second. And her responses after having been told either the first or the second story 
would have proved to my satisfaction and hers that the story I had told her was true- 
completely, irrefutably true. And that would have been advice. 

Figure It Out for Yourself 

I decided instead to listen. I have learned not to steal my clients' problems from them. I 
don't want to be the redeeming hero or the deus ex machina -not in someone else's story. I 
don't want their lives. So, I asked her to tell me what she thought, and I listened. She 
talked a lot. When we were finished, she still didn't know if she had been raped, and 
neither did I. Life is very complicated. 

Sometimes you have to change the way you understand everything to properly 
understand a single something. "Was I raped?" can be a very complicated question. The 
mere fact that the question would present itself in that form indicates the existence of 
infinite layers of complexity-to say nothing of "five times." There are a myriad of 
questions hidden inside "Was I raped?": What is rape? What is consent? What 
constitutes appropriate sexual caution? How should a person defend herself? Where does 
the fault lie? "Was I raped?" is a hydra. If you cut off the head of a hydra, seven more 


168 



grow. That's life. Miss S would have had to talk for twenty years to figure out whether she 
had been raped. And someone would have had to be there to listen. I started the process, 
but circumstances made it impossible for me to finish. She left therapy with me only 
somewhat less ill-formed and vague than when she first met me. But at least she didn't 
leave as the living embodiment of my damned ideology. 

The people I listen to need to talk, because that's how people think. People need to 
think. Otherwise they wander blindly into pits. When people think, they simulate the 
world, and plan how to act in it. If they do a good job of simulating, they can figure out 
what stupid things they shouldn't do. Then they can not do them. Then they don't have 
to suffer the consequences. That's the purpose of thinking. But we can't do it alone. We 
simulate the world, and plan our actions in it. Only human beings do this. That's how 
brilliant we are. We make little avatars of ourselves. We place those avatars in fictional 
worlds. Then we watch what happens. If our avatar thrives, then we act like he does, in 
the real world. Then we thrive (we hope). If our avatar fails, we don't go there, if we have 
any sense. We let him die in the fictional world, so that we don't have to really die in the 
present. 

Imagine two children talking. The younger one says, "Wouldn't it be fun to climb up on 
the roof?" He has just placed a little avatar of himself in a fictional world. But his older 
sister objects. She chimes in. "That's stupid," she says. "What if you fall off the roof? 
What if Dad catches you?" The younger child can then modify the original simulation, 
draw the appropriate conclusion, and let the whole fictional world wither on the vine. Or 
not. Maybe the risk is worth it. But at least now it can be factored in. The fictional world 
is a bit more complete, and the avatar a bit wiser. 

People think they think, but it's not true. It's mostly self-criticism that passes for 
thinking. True thinking is rare-just like true listening. Thinking is listening to yourself. 
It's difficult. To think, you have to be at least two people at the same time. Then you have 
to let those people disagree. Thinking is an internal dialogue between two or more 
different views of the world. Viewpoint One is an avatar in a simulated world. It has its 
own representations of past, present and future, and its own ideas about how to act. So 
do Viewpoints Two, and Three, and Four. Thinking is the process by which these internal 
avatars imagine and articulate their worlds to one another. You can't set straw men 
against one another when you're thinking, either, because then you're not thinking. 
You're rationalizing, post-hoc. You're matching what you want against a weak opponent 
so that you don't have to change your mind. You're propagandizing. You're using double- 
speak. You're using your conclusions to justify your proofs. You're hiding from the truth. 

True thinking is complex and demanding. It requires you to be articulate speaker and 
careful, judicious listener, at the same time. It involves conflict. So, you have to tolerate 
conflict. Conflict involves negotiation and compromise. So, you have to learn to give and 
take and to modify your premises and adjust your thoughts-even your perceptions of the 
world. Sometimes it results in the defeat and elimination of one or more internal avatar. 
They don't like to be defeated or eliminated, either. They're hard to build. They're 
valuable. They're alive. They like to stay alive. They'll fight to stay alive. You better listen 
to them. If you don't they'll go underground and turn into devils and torture you. In 
consequence, thinking is emotionally painful, as well as physiologically demanding; more 
so than anything else-except not thinking. But you have to be very articulate and 
sophisticated to have all of this occur inside your own head. What are you to do, then, if 
you aren't very good at thinking, at being two people at one time? That's easy. You talk. 
But you need someone to listen. A listening person is your collaborator and your 
opponent. 

A listening person tests your talking (and your thinking) without having to say 
anything. A listening person is a representative of common humanity. He stands for the 


169 



crowd. Now the crowd is by no means always right, but it's commonly right. It's typically 
right. If you say something that takes everyone aback, therefore, you should reconsider 
what you said. I say that, knowing full well that controversial opinions are sometimes 
correct-sometimes so much so that the crowd will perish if it refuses to listen. It is for 
this reason, among others, that the individual is morally obliged to stand up and tell the 
truth of his or her own experience. But something new and radical is still almost always 
wrong. You need good, even great, reasons to ignore or defy general, public opinion. 
That's your culture. It's a mighty oak. You perch on one of its branches. If the branch 
breaks, it's a long way down-farther, perhaps, than you think. If you're reading this 
book, there's a strong probability that you're a privileged person. You can read. You have 
time to read. You're perched high in the clouds. It took untold generations to get you 
where you are. A little gratitude might be in order. If you're going to insist on bending the 
world to your way, you better have your reasons. If you're going to stand your ground, 
you better have your reasons. You better have thought them through. You might 
otherwise be in for a very hard landing. You should do what other people do, unless you 
have a very good reason not to. If you're in a rut, at least you know that other people have 
travelled that path. Out of the rut is too often off the road. And in the desert that awaits 
off the road there are highwaymen and monsters. 

So speaks wisdom. 

A Listening Person 

A listening person can reflect the crowd. He can do that without talking. He can do that 
merely by letting the talking person listen to himself. That is what Freud recommended. 
He had his patients lay on a couch, look at the ceiling, let their minds wander, and say 
whatever wandered in. That's his method of free association. That's the way the Freudian 
psychoanalyst avoids transferring his or her own personal biases and opinions into the 
internal landscape of the patient. It was for such reasons that Freud did not face his 
patients. He did not want their spontaneous meditations to be altered by his emotional 
expressions, no matter how slight. He was properly concerned that his own opinions- 
and, worse, his own unresolved problems-would find themselves uncontrollably 
reflected in his responses and reactions, conscious and unconscious alike. He was afraid 
that he would in such a manner detrimentally affect the development of his patients. It 
was for such reasons, as well, that Freud insisted that psychoanalysts be analyzed 
themselves. He wanted those who practiced his method to uncover and eliminate some of 
their own worst blind spots and prejudices, so they would not practise corruptly. Freud 
had a point. He was, after all, a genius. You can tell that because people still hate him. 
But there are disadvantages to the detached and somewhat distant approach 
recommended by Freud. Many of those who seek therapy desire and need a closer, more 
personal relationship (although that also has its dangers). This is in part why I have opted 
in my practice for the conversation, instead of the Freudian method-as have most 
clinical psychologists. 

It can be worthwhile for my clients to see my reactions. To protect them from the 
undue influence that might produce, I attempt to set my aim properly, so that my 
responses emerge from the appropriate motivation. I do what I can to want the best for 
them (whatever that might be). I do my best to want the best, period, as well (because 
that is part of wanting the best for my clients). I try to clear my mind, and to leave my 
own concerns aside. That way I am concentrating on what is best for my clients, while I 
am simultaneously alert to any cues that I might be misunderstanding what that best is. 
That's something that has to be negotiated, not assumed on my part. It's something that 
has to be managed very carefully, to mitigate the risks of close, personal interaction. My 


170 



clients talk. I listen. Sometimes I respond. Often the response is subtle. It's not even 
verbal. My clients and I face each other. We make eye contact. We can see each other's 
expressions. They can observe the effects of their words on me, and I can observe the 
effects of mine on them. They can respond to my responses. 

A client of mine might say, "I hate my wife." It's out there, once said. It's hanging in 
the air. It has emerged from the underworld, materialized from chaos, and manifested 
itself. It is perceptible and concrete and no longer easily ignored. It's become real. The 
speaker has even startled himself. He sees the same thing reflected in my eyes. He notes 
that, and continues on the road to sanity. "Hold it," he says. "Back up. That's too harsh. 
Sometimes I hate my wife. I hate her when she won't tell me what she wants. My mom did 
that all the time, too. It drove Dad crazy. It drove all of us crazy, to tell you the truth. It 
even drove Mom crazy! She was a nice person, but she was very resentful. Well, at least 
my wife isn't as bad as my mother. Not at all. Wait! I guess my wife is actually pretty 
good at telling me what she wants, but I get really bothered when she doesn't, because 
Mom tortured us all half to death being a martyr. That really affected me. Maybe I 
overreact now when it happens even a bit. Hey! I'm acting just like Dad did when Mom 
upset him! That isn't me. That doesn't have anything to do with my wife! I better let her 
know." I observe from all this that my client had failed previously to properly distinguish 
his wife from his mother. And I see that he was possessed, unconsciously, by the spirit of 
his father. He sees all of that too. Now he is a bit more differentiated, a bit less an 
uncarved block, a bit less hidden in the fog. He has sewed up a small tear in the fabric of 
his culture. He says, "That was a good session, Dr. Peterson." I nod. You can be pretty 
smart if you can just shut up. 

I'm a collaborator and opponent even when I'm not talking. I can't help it. My 
expressions broadcast my response, even when they're subtle. So, I'm communicating, as 
Freud so rightly stressed, even when silent. But I also talk in my clinical sessions. How do 
I know when to say something? First, as I said, I put myself in the proper frame of mind. I 
aim properly. I want things to be better. My mind orients itself, given this goal. It tries to 
produce responses to the therapeutic dialogue that furthers that aim. I watch what 
happens, internally. I reveal my responses. That's the first rule. Sometimes, for example, a 
client will say something, and a thought will occur to me, or a fantasy flit through my 
mind. Frequently it's about something that was said by the same client earlier that day, or 
during a previous session. Then I tell my client that thought or fantasy. Disinterestedly. I 
say, "You said this and I noticed that I then became aware of this." Then we discuss it. 
We try to determine the relevance of meaning of my reaction. Sometimes, perhaps, it's 
about me. That was Freud's point. But sometimes it is just the reaction of a detached but 
positively inclined human being to a personally revealing statement by another human 
being. It's meaningful-sometimes, even, corrective. Sometimes, however, it's me that 
gets corrected. 

You have to get along with other people. A therapist is one of those other people. A 
good therapist will tell you the truth about what he thinks. (That is not the same thing as 
telling you that what he thinks is the truth.) Then at least you have the honest opinion of 
at least one person. That's not so easy to get. That's not nothing. That's key to the 
psychotherapeutic process: two people tell each other the truth-and both listen. 

How Should You Listen? 

Carl Rogers, one of the twentieth century's great psychotherapists, knew something 
about listening. He wrote, "The great majority of us cannot listen; we find ourselves 
compelled to evaluate, because listening is too dangerous. The first requirement is 
courage, and we do not always have it." He knew that listening could transform people. 


171 


On that, Rogers commented, "Some of you may be feeling that you listen well to people, 
and that you have never seen such results. The chances are very great indeed that your 
listening has not been of the type I have described." He suggested that his readers 
conduct a short experiment when they next found themselves in a dispute: "Stop the 
discussion for a moment, and institute this rule: 'Each person can speak up for himself 
only after he has first restated the ideas and feelings of the previous speaker accurately, 
and to that speaker's satisfaction.' " I have found this technique very useful, in my private 
life and in my practice. I routinely summarize what people have said to me, and ask them 
if I have understood properly. Sometimes they accept my summary. Sometimes I am 
offered a small correction. Now and then I am wrong completely. All of that is good to 
know. 

There are several primary advantages to this process of summary. The first advantage is 
that I genuinely come to understand what the person is saying. Of this, Rogers notes, 
"Sounds simple, doesn't it? But if you try it you will discover it is one of the most difficult 
things you have ever tried to do. If you really understand a person in this way, if you are 
willing to enter his private world and see the way life appears to him, you run the risk of 
being changed yourself. You might see it his way, you might find yourself influenced in 
your attitudes or personality. This risk of being changed is one of the most frightening 
prospects most of us can face." More salutary words have rarely been written. 

The second advantage to the act of summary is that it aids the person in consolidation 
and utility of memory. Consider the following situation: A client in my practice recounts a 
long, meandering, emotion-laden account of a difficult period in his or her life. We 
summarize, back and forth. The account becomes shorter. It is now summed up, in the 
client's memory (and in mine) in the form we discussed. It is now a different memory, in 
many ways-with luck, a better memory. It is now less weighty. It has been distilled; 
reduced to the gist. We have extracted the moral of the story. It becomes a description of 
the cause and the result of what happened, formulated such that repetition of the tragedy 
and pain becomes less likely in the future. "This is what happened. This is why. This is 
what I have to do to avoid such things from now on": That's a successful memory. That's 
the purpose of memory. You remember the past not so that it is "accurately recorded," to 
say it again, but so that you are prepared for the future. 

The third advantage to employing the Rogerian method is the difficulty it poses to the 
careless construction of straw-man arguments. When someone opposes you, it is very 
tempting to oversimplify, parody, or distort his or her position. This is a 
counterproductive game, designed both to harm the dissenter and to unjustly raise your 
personal status. By contrast, if you are called upon to summarize someone's position, so 
that the speaking person agrees with that summary, you may have to state the argument 
even more clearly and succinctly than the speaker has even yet managed. If you first give 
the devil his due, looking at his arguments from his perspective, you can (1) find the 
value in them, and learn something in the process, or (2) hone your positions against 
them (if you still believe they are wrong) and strengthen your arguments further against 
challenge. This will make you much stronger. Then you will no longer have to 
misrepresent your opponent's position (and may well have bridged at least part of the gap 
between the two of you). You will also be much better at withstanding your own doubts. 

Sometimes it takes a long time to figure out what someone genuinely means when they 
are talking. This is because often they are articulating their ideas for the first time. They 
can't do it without wandering down blind alleys or making contradictory or even 
nonsensical claims. This is partly because talking (and thinking) is often more about 
forgetting than about remembering. To discuss an event, particularly something 
emotional, like a death or serious illness, is to slowly choose what to leave behind. To 
begin, however, much that is not necessary must be put into words. The emotion-laden 


172 



speaker must recount the whole experience, in detail. Only then can the central narrative, 
cause and consequence, come into focus or consolidate itself. Only then can the moral of 
the story be derived. 

Imagine that someone holds a stack of hundred-dollar bills, some of which are 
counterfeit. All the bills might have to be spread on a table, so that each can be seen, and 
any differences noted, before the genuine can be distinguished from the false. This is the 
sort of methodical approach you have to take when really listening to someone trying to 
solve a problem or communicate something important. If upon learning that some of the 
bills are counterfeit you too casually dismiss all of them (as you would if you were in a 
hurry, or otherwise unwilling to put in the effort), the person will never learn to separate 
wheat from chaff. 

If you listen, instead, without premature judgment, people will generally tell you 
everything they are thinking-and with very little deceit. People will tell you the most 
amazing, absurd, interesting things. Very few of your conversations will be boring. (You 
can in fact tell whether or not you are actually listening in this manner. If the 
conversation is boring, you probably aren't.) 

Primate Dominance-Hierarchy Manoeuvres-and Wit 

Not all talking is thinking. Nor does all listening foster transformation. There are other 
motives for both, some of which produce much less valuable, counterproductive and even 
dangerous outcomes. There is the conversation, for example, where one participant is 
speaking merely to establish or confirm his place in the dominance hierarchy. One person 
begins by telling a story about some interesting occurrence, recent or past, that involved 
something good, bad or surprising enough to make the listening worthwhile. The other 
person, now concerned with his or her potentially substandard status as less-interesting 
individual, immediately thinks of something better, worse, or more surprising to relate. 
This isn't one of those situations where two conversational participants are genuinely 
playing off each other, riffing on the same themes, for the mutual enjoyment of both (and 
everyone else). This is jockeying for position, pure and simple. You can tell when one of 
those conversations is occurring. They are accompanied by a feeling of embarrassment 
among speakers and alike, all who know that something false and exaggerated has just 
been said. 

There is another, closely allied form of conversation, where neither speaker is listening 
in the least to the other. Instead, each is using the time occupied by the current speaker 
to conjure up what he or she will say next, which will often be something off-topic, 
because the person anxiously waiting to speak has not been listening. This can and will 
bring the whole conversational train to a shuddering halt. At this point, it is usual for 
those who were on board during the crash to remain silent, and look occasionally and in a 
somewhat embarrassed manner at each other, until everyone leaves, or someone thinks of 
something witty and puts Humpty Dumpty together again. 

Then there is the conversation where one participant is trying to attain victory for his 
point of view. This is yet another variant of the dominance-hierarchy conversation. 
During such a conversation, which often tends toward the ideological, the speaker 
endeavours to (1) denigrate or ridicule the viewpoint of anyone holding a contrary 
position, (2) use selective evidence while doing so and, finally, (3) impress the listeners 
(many of whom are already occupying the same ideological space) with the validity of his 
assertions. The goal is to gain support for a comprehensive, unitary, oversimplified world- 
view. Thus, the purpose of the conversation is to make the case that not thinking is the 
correct tack. The person who is speaking in this manner believes that winning the 
argument makes him right, and that doing so necessarily validates the assumption- 


173 



structure of the dominance hierarchy he most identifies with. This is often-and 
unsurprisingly-the hierarchy within which he has achieved the most success, or the one 
with which he is most temperamentally aligned. Almost all discussions involving politics 
or economics unfold in this manner, with each participant attempting to justify fixed, a 
priori positions instead of trying to learn something or to adopt a different frame (even for 
the novelty). It is for this reason that conservatives and liberals alike believe their 
positions to be self-evident, particularly as they become more extreme. Given certain 
temperamentally-based assumptions, a predictable conclusion emerges-but only when 
you ignore the fact that the assumptions themselves are mutable. 

These conversations are very different from the listening type. When a genuine 
listening conversation is taking place, one person at a time has the floor, and everyone 
else is listening. The person speaking is granted the opportunity to seriously discuss some 
event, usually unhappy or even tragic. Everyone else responds sympathetically. These 
conversations are important because the speaker is organizing the troublesome event in 
his or her mind, while recounting the story. The fact is important enough to bear 
repeating: people organize their brains with conversation. If they don't have anyone to tell 
their story to, they lose their minds. Like hoarders, they cannot unclutter themselves. The 
input of the community is required for the integrity of the individual psyche. To put it 
another way: It takes a village to organize a mind. 

Much of what we consider healthy mental function is the result of our ability to use the 
reactions of others to keep our complex selves functional. We outsource the problem of our 
sanity. This is why it is the fundamental responsibility of parents to render their children 
socially acceptable. If a person's behaviour is such that other people can tolerate him, 
then all he has to do is place himself in a social context. Then people will indicate-by 
being interested in or bored by what he says, or laughing or not laughing at his jokes, or 
teasing or ridiculing, or even by lifting an eyebrow-whether his actions and statements 
are what they should be. Everyone is always broadcasting to everyone else their desire to 
encounter the ideal. We punish and reward each other precisely to the degree that each of 
us behaves in keeping with that desire-except, of course, when we are looking for 
trouble. 

The sympathetic responses offered during a genuine conversation indicate that the 
teller is valued, and that the story being told is important, serious, deserving of 
consideration, and understandable. Men and women often misunderstand each other 
when these conversations are focused on a specified problem. Men are often accused of 
wanting to "fix things" too early on in a discussion. This frustrates men, who like to solve 
problems and to do it efficiently and who are in fact called upon frequently by women for 
precisely that purpose. It might be easier for my male readers to understand why this 
does not work, however, if they could realize and then remember that before a problem 
can be solved it must be formulated precisely. Women are often intent on formulating the 
problem when they are discussing something, and they need to be listened to-even 
questioned-to help ensure clarity in the formulation. Then, whatever problem is left, if 
any, can be helpfully solved. (It should also be noted first that too-early problem-solving 
may also merely indicate a desire to escape from the effort of the problem-formulating 
conversation.) 

Another conversational variant is the lecture. A lecture is-somewhat surprisingly-a 
conversation. The lecturer speaks, but the audience communicates with him or her non- 
verbally. A surprising amount of human interaction-much of the delivery of emotional 
information, for example-takes place in this manner, through postural display and facial 
emotion (as we noted in our discussion of Freud). A good lecturer is not only delivering 
facts (which is perhaps the least important part of a lecture), but also telling stories about 
those facts, pitching them precisely to the level of the audience's comprehension, gauging 


174 



that by the interest they are showing. The story he or she is telling conveys to the 
members of the audience not only what the facts are, but why they are relevant-why it is 
important to know certain things about which they are currently ignorant. To 
demonstrate the importance of some set of facts is to tell those audience members how 
such knowledge could change their behaviour, or influence the way they interpret the 
world, so that they will now be able to avoid some obstacles and progress more rapidly to 
some better goals. 

A good lecturer is thus talking with and not at or even to his or her listeners. To manage 
this, the lecturer needs to be closely attending to the audience's every move, gesture and 
sound. Perversely, this cannot he done by watching the audience, as such. A good lecturer 
speaks directly to and watches the response of single, identifiable people, instead of 
doing something cliched, such as "presenting a talk" to an audience. Everything about 
that phrase is wrong. You don't present. You talk. There is no such thing as "a talk," 
unless it's canned, and it shouldn't be. There is also no "audience." There are individuals, 
who need to be included in the conversation. A well-practised and competent public 
speaker addresses a single, identifiable person, watches that individual nod, shake his 
head, frown, or look confused, and responds appropriately and directly to those gestures 
and expressions. Then, after a few phrases, rounding out some idea, he switches to 
another audience member, and does the same thing. In this manner, he infers and reacts 
to the attitude of the entire group (insofar as such a thing exists). 

There are still other conversations that work primarily as demonstrations of wit. These 
also have a dominance element, but the goal is to be the most entertaining speaker 
(which is an accomplishment that everyone participating will also enjoy). The purpose of 
these conversations, as a witty friend of mine once observed, was to say "anything that 
was either true or funny." As truth and humour are often close allies, that combination 
worked fine. I think that this might be the intelligent blue-collar worker's conversation. I 
participated in many fine bouts of sarcasm, satire, insult and generally over-the-top 
comedic exchange around among people I grew up with in Northern Alberta and, later, 
among some Navy SEALs I met in California, who were friends of an author I know who 
writes somewhat horrifying popular fiction. They were all perfectly happy to say anything, 
no matter how appalling, as long it was funny. 

I attended this writer's fortieth birthday celebration not too long ago in LA. He had 
invited one of the aforementioned SEALs. A few months beforehand, however, his wife 
had been diagnosed with a serious medical condition, necessitating brain surgery. He 
called up his SEAL friend, informed him of the circumstances, and indicated that the 
event might have to be cancelled. "You think you guys have a problem," responded his 
friend. "I just bought non-refundable airline tickets to your party!" It's not clear what 
percentage of the world's population would find that response amusing. I retold the story 
recently to a group of newer acquaintances and they were more shocked and appalled 
than amused. I tried to defend the joke as an indication of the SEAL'S respect for the 
couple's ability to withstand and transcend tragedy, but I wasn't particularly successful. 
Nonetheless, I believe that he did intend exactly that respect, and I think he was 
terrifyingly witty. His joke was daring, anarchic to the point of recklessness, which is 
exactly the point where serious funny occurs. My friend and his wife recognized the 
compliment. They saw that their friend knew they were tough enough to withstand that 
level of-well, let's call it competitive humour. It was a test of character, which they 
passed with flying colours. 

I found that such conversations occurred less and less frequently as I moved from 
university to university, up the educational and social ladder. Maybe it wasn't a class 
thing, although I have my suspicions it was. Maybe it's just that I'm older, or that the 
friends a person makes later in life, after adolescence, lack the insane competitive 


175 


closeness and perverse playfulness of those early tribal bonds. When I went back up north 
to my hometown for my fiftieth birthday party, however, my old friends made me laugh 
so hard I had to duck into a different room several times to catch my breath. Those 
conversations are the most fun, and I miss them. You have to keep up, or risk severe 
humiliation, but there is nothing more rewarding than topping the last comedian's story, 
joke, insult or curse. Only one rule really applies: do not be boring (although it is also 
very bad form to actually put someone down, when you are only pretending to put them 
down). 

Conversation on the Way 

The final type of conversation, akin to listening, is a form of mutual exploration. It 
requires true reciprocity on the part of those listening and speaking. It allows all 
participants to express and organize their thoughts. A conversation of mutual exploration 
has a topic, generally complex, of genuine interest to the participants. Everyone 
participating is trying to solve a problem, instead of insisting on the a priori validity of 
their own positions. All are acting on the premise that they have something to learn. This 
kind of conversation constitutes active philosophy, the highest form of thought, and the 
best preparation for proper living. 

The people involved in such a conversation must be discussing ideas they genuinely use 
to structure their perceptions and guide their actions and words. They must be 
existentially involved with their philosophy: that is, they must be living it, not merely 
believing or understanding it. They also must have inverted, at least temporarily, the 
typical human preference for order over chaos (and I don't mean the chaos typical of 
mindless antisocial rebellion). Other conversational types-except for the listening type- 
all attempt to buttress some existing order. The conversation of mutual exploration, by 
contrast, requires people who have decided that the unknown makes a better friend than 
the known. 

You already know what you know, after all-and, unless your life is perfect, what you 
know is not enough. You remain threatened by disease, and self-deception, and 
unhappiness, and malevolence, and betrayal, and corruption, and pain, and limitation. 
You are subject to all these things, in the final analysis, because you are just too ignorant 
to protect yourself. If you just knew enough, you could be healthier and more honest. You 
would suffer less. You could recognize, resist and even triumph over malevolence and 
evil. You would neither betray a friend, nor deal falsely and deceitfully in business, 
politics or love. However, your current knowledge has neither made you perfect nor kept 
you safe. So, it is insufficient, by definition-radically, fatally insufficient. 

You must accept this before you can converse philosophically, instead of convincing, 
oppressing, dominating or even amusing. You must accept this before you can tolerate a 
conversation where the Word that eternally mediates between order and chaos is 
operating, psychologically speaking. To have this kind of conversation, it is necessary to 
respect the personal experience of your conversational partners. You must assume that 
they have reached careful, thoughtful, genuine conclusions (and, perhaps, they must have 
done the work that justifies this assumption). You must believe that if they shared their 
conclusions with you, you could bypass at least some of the pain of personally learning 
the same things (as learning from the experience of others can be quicker and much less 
dangerous). You must meditate, too, instead of strategizing towards victory. If you fail, or 
refuse, to do so, then you merely and automatically repeat what you already believe, 
seeking its validation and insisting on its rightness. But if you are meditating as you 
converse, then you listen to the other person, and say the new and original things that can 
rise from deep within of their own accord. 


176 



It's as if you are listening to yourself during such a conversation, just as you are listening to the 
other person. You are describing how you are responding to the new information imparted 
by the speaker. You are reporting what that information has done to you-what new 
things it made appear within you, how it has changed your presuppositions, how it has 
made you think of new questions. You tell the speaker these things, directly. Then they 
have the same effect on him. In this manner, you both move towards somewhere newer 
and broader and better. You both change, as you let your old presuppositions die-as you 
shed your skins and emerge renewed. 

A conversation such as this is one where it is the desire for truth itself-on the part of 
both participants-that is truly listening and speaking. That's why it's engaging, vital, 
interesting and meaningful. That sense of meaning is a signal from the deep, ancient parts 
of your Being. You're where you should be, with one foot in order, and the other 
tentatively extended into chaos and the unknown. You're immersed in the Tao, following 
the great Way of Life. There, you're stable enough to be secure, but flexible enough to 
transform. There, you're allowing new information to inform you-to permeate your 
stability, to repair and improve its structure, and expand its domain. There the 
constituent elements of your Being can find their more elegant formation. A conversation 
like that places you in the same place that listening to great music places you, and for 
much the same reason. A conversation like that puts you in the realm where souls 
connect, and that's a real place. It leaves you thinking, "That was really worthwhile. We 
really got to know each other." The masks came off, and the searchers were revealed. 

So, listen, to yourself and to those with whom you are speaking. Your wisdom then 
consists not of the knowledge you already have, but the continual search for knowledge, 
which is the highest form of wisdom. It is for this reason that the priestess of the Delphic 
Oracle in ancient Greece spoke most highly of Socrates, who always sought the truth. She 
described him as the wisest living man, because he knew that what he knew was nothing. 

Assume that the person you are listening to might know something you don't. 


177 



/** 

VS 


178 





179 





a 


180 


RULE 10 

BE PRECISE IN YOUR SPEECH 


WHY IS MY LAPTOP OBSOLETE? 

What do you see, when you look at a computer-at your own laptop, more precisely? You 
see a flat, thin, grey-and-black box. Less evidently, you see something to type on and look 
at. Nonetheless, even with the second perceptions included, what are you seeing is hardly 
the computer at all. That grey and black box happens to be a computer right now, right 
here and now, and maybe even an expensive computer. Nevertheless, it will soon be 
something so unlike a computer that it will be difficult even to give away. 

We will all discard our laptops within the next five years, even though they may still 
work perfectly-even though the screens, keyboards, mice and internet connections may 
still flawlessly perform their tasks. Fifty years from now, early twenty-first-century 
laptops will be oddities like the brass scientific tools of the late nineteenth century. The 
latter now appear more like the arcane accoutrements of alchemy, designed to measure 
phenomena whose existence we no longer even recognize. How can high-tech machines, 
each possessing more computing power than the entire Apollo space program, lose their 
value in such a short period of time? How can they transform so quickly from exciting, 
useful and status-enhancing machines to complex pieces of junk? It's because of the 
nature of our perceptions themselves, and the oft-invisible interaction between those 
perceptions and the underlying complexity of the world. 

Your laptop is a note in a symphony currently being played by an orchestra of 
incalculable size. It's a very small part of a much greater whole. Most of its capacity 
resides beyond its hard shell. It maintains its function only because a vast array of other 
technologies are currently and harmoniously at play. It is fed, for example, by a power 
grid whose function is invisibly dependent on the stability of a myriad of complex 
physical, biological, economic and interpersonal systems. The factories that make its parts 
are still in operation. The operating system that enables its function is based on those 
parts, and not on others yet to be created. Its video hardware runs the technology 
expected by the creative people who post their content on the web. Your laptop is in 
communication with a certain, specified ecosystem of other devices and web servers. 

And, finally, all this is made possible by an even less visible element: the social contract 
of trust-the interconnected and fundamentally honest political and economic systems 
that make the reliable electrical grid a reality. This interdependency of part on whole, 
invisible in systems that work, becomes starkly evident in systems that don't. The higher- 
order, surrounding systems that enable personal computing hardly exist at all in corrupt, 
third-world countries, so that the power lines, electrical switches, outlets, and all the 
other entities so hopefully and concretely indicative of such a grid are absent or 
compromised, and in fact make little contribution to the practical delivery of electricity to 
people's homes and factories. This makes perceiving the electronic and other devices that 
electricity theoretically enables as separate, functional units frustrating, at minimum, and 
impossible, at worst. This is partly because of technical insufficiency: the systems simply 
don't work. But it is also in no small part because of the lack of trust characteristic of 
systemically corrupt societies. 

To put it another way: What you perceive as your computer is like a single leaf, on a 
tree, in a forest-or, even more accurately, like your fingers rubbing briefly across that 
leaf. A single leaf can be plucked from a branch. It can be perceived, briefly, as a single, 


181 



self-contained entity-but that perception misleads more than clarifies. In a few weeks, 
the leaf will crumble and dissolve. It would not have been there at all, without the tree. It 
cannot continue to exist, in the absence of the tree. This is the position of our laptops in 
relation to the world. So much of what they are resides outside their boundaries that the 
screened devices we hold on our laps can only maintain their computer-like fagade for a 
few short years. 

Almost everything we see and hold is like that, although often not so evidently. 

Tools, Obstacles and Extension into the World 

We assume that we see objects or things when we look at the world, but that's not really 
how it is. Our evolved perceptual systems transform the interconnected, complex multi- 
level world that we inhabit not so much into things per se as into useful things (or their 
nemeses, things that get in the way). This is the necessary, practical reduction of the 
world. This is the transformation of the near-infinite complexity of things through the 
narrow specification of our purpose. This is how precision makes the world sensibly 
manifest. That is not at all the same as perceiving objects. 

We don't see valueless entities and then attribute meaning to them. We perceive the 
meaning directly. We see floors, to walk on, and doors, to duck through, and chairs, to 
sit on. It's for this reason that a beanbag and a stump both fall into the latter category, 
despite having little objectively in common. We see rocks, because we can throw them, 
and clouds, because they can rain on us, and apples, to eat, and the automobiles of other 
people, to get in our way and annoy us. We see tools and obstacles, not objects or things. 
Furthermore, we see tools and obstacles at the "handy" level of analysis that makes them 
most useful (or dangerous), given our needs, abilities and perceptual limitations. The 
world reveals itself to us as something to utilize and something to navigate through-not 
as something that merely is. 

We see the faces of the people we are talking to, because we need to communicate with 
those people and cooperate with them. We don't see their microcosmic substructures, 
their cells, or the subcellular organelles, molecules and atoms that make up those cells. 
We don't see, as well, the macrocosm that surrounds them: the family members and 
friends that make up their immediate social circles, the economies they are embedded 
within, or the ecology that contains all of them. Finally, and equally importantly, we don't 
see them across time. We see them in the narrow, immediate, overwhelming now, instead 
of surrounded by the yesterdays and tomorrows that may be a more important part of 
them than whatever is currently and obviously manifest. And we have to see in this way, 
or be overwhelmed. 

When we look at the world, we perceive only what is enough for our plans and actions 
to work and for us to get by. What we inhabit, then, is this "enough." That is a radical, 
functional, unconscious simplification of the world-and it's almost impossible for us not 
to mistake it for the world itself. But the objects we see are not simply there, in the world, 
for our simple, direct perceiving. They exist in a complex, multi-dimensional 
relationship to one another, not as self-evidently separate, bounded, independent objects. 
We perceive not them, but their functional utility and, in doing so, we make them 
sufficiently simple for sufficient understanding. It is for this reason that we must be precise in 
our aim. Absent that, we drown in the complexity of the world. 

This is true even for our perceptions of ourselves, of our individual persons. We assume 
that we end at the surface of our skin, because of the way that we perceive. But we can 
understand with a little thought the provisional nature of that boundary. We shift what is 
inside our skin, so to speak, as the context we inhabit changes. Even when we do 
something as apparently simple as picking up a screwdriver, our brain automatically 


182 


adjusts what it considers body to include the tool. We can literally feel things with the 
end of the screwdriver. When we extend a hand, holding the screwdriver, we 
automatically take the length of the latter into account. We can probe nooks and crannies 
with its extended end, and comprehend what we are exploring. Furthermore, we instantly 
regard the screwdriver we are holding as "our" screwdriver, and get possessive about it. 
We do the same with the much more complex tools we use, in much more complex 
situations. The cars we pilot instantaneously and automatically become ourselves. 
Because of this, when someone bangs his fist on our car's hood after we have irritated 
him at a crosswalk, we take it personally. This is not always reasonable. Nonetheless, 
without the extension of self into machine, it would be impossible to drive. 

The extensible boundaries of our selves also expand to include other people-family 
members, lovers and friends. A mother will sacrifice herself for her children. Is our father 
or son or wife or husband more or less integral to us than an arm or a leg? We can 
answer, in part, by asking: Which we rather lose? Which loss would we sacrifice more to 
avoid? We practice for such permanent extension-such permanent commitment-by 
identifying with the fictional characters of books and movies. Their tragedies and 
triumphs rapidly and convincingly become ours. Sitting still in our seats, we nonetheless 
act out a multitude of alternate realities, extending ourselves experimentally, testing 
multiple potential paths, before specifying the one we will actually take. Engrossed in a 
fictional world, we can even become things that don't "really" exist. In the blink of an eye, 
in the magic hall of a movie theatre, we can become fantastical creatures. We sit in the 
dark before rapidly flickering images and become witches, superheroes, aliens, vampires, 
lions, elves or wooden marionettes. We feel everything they feel, and are peculiarly happy 
to pay for the privilege, even when what we experience is sorrow, fear or horror. 

Something similar, but more extreme, happens when we identify, not with a character 
in a fictional drama, but with a whole group, in a competition. Think of what happens 
when a favourite team wins or loses an important game against an arch-rival. The winning 
goal will bring the whole network of fans to their feet, before they think, in unscripted 
unison. It is as if their many nervous systems are directly wired to the game unfolding in 
front of them. Fans take the victories and defeats of their teams very personally, even 
wearing the jerseys of their heroes, often celebrating their wins and losses more than any 
such events that "actually" occur in their day-to-day lives. This identification manifests 
itself deeply-even biochemically and neurologically. Vicarious experiences of winning 
and losing, for example, raise and lower testosterone levels among fans "participating" in 
the contest. Our capacity for identification is something that manifests itself at every 
level of our Being. 

To the degree that we are patriotic, similarly, our country is not just important to us. It is 
us. We might even sacrifice our entire smaller individual selves, in battle, to maintain the 
integrity of our country. For much of history, such willingness to die has been regarded as 
something admirable and courageous, as a part of human duty. Paradoxically, that is a 
direct consequence not of our aggression but of our extreme sociability and willingness to 
cooperate. If we can become not only ourselves, but our families, teams and countries, 
cooperation comes easily to us, relying on the same deeply innate mechanisms that drive 
us (and other creatures) to protect our very bodies. 

The World Is Simple Only When It Behaves 

It is very difficult to make sense of the interconnected chaos of reality, just by looking at 
it. It's a very complicated act, requiring, perhaps, half our brains. Everything shifts and 
changes in the real world. Each hypothetically separate thing is made up of smaller 
hypothetically separate things, and is simultaneously part of larger hypothetically separate 


183 


things. The boundaries between the levels-and between different things themselves at a 
given level-are neither clear nor self-evident, objectively. They must be established 
practically, pragmatically, and they retain their validity only under very narrow and 
specified conditions. The conscious illusion of complete and sufficient perception only 
sustains itself, for example-only remains sufficient for our purposes-when everything 
goes according to plan. Under such circumstances, what we see is accurate enough, so 
that there is no utility in looking farther. To drive successfully, we don't have to 
understand, or even perceive, the complex machinery of our automobiles. The hidden 
complexities of our private cars only intrude on our consciousness when that machinery 
fails, or when we collide unexpectedly with something (or something with us). Even in 
the case of mere mechanical failure (to say nothing of a serious accident) such intrusion is 
always felt, at least initially, as anxiety-provoking. That's a consequence of emergent 
uncertainty. 

A car, as we perceive it, is not a thing, or an object. It is instead something that takes us 
somewhere we want to go. It is only when it stops taking us and going, in fact, that we 
perceive it much at all. It is only when a car quits, suddenly-or is involved in an accident 
and must be pulled over to the side of the road-that we are forced to apprehend and 
analyze the myriad of parts that "car as thing that goes" depends on. When our car fails, 
our incompetence with regards to its complexity is instantly revealed. That has practical 
consequences (we don't get to go to where we were going), as well as psychological: our 
peace of mind disappears along with our functioning vehicle. We must generally turn to 
the experts who inhabit garages and workshops to restore both functionality to our 
vehicle and simplicity to our perceptions. That's mechanic-as-psychologist. 

It is precisely then that we can understand, although we seldom deeply consider, the 
staggeringly low-resolution quality of our vision and the inadequacy of our corresponding 
understanding. In a crisis, when our thing no longer goes, we turn to those whose 
expertise far transcends ours to restore the match between our expectant desire and what 
actually happens. This all means that the failure of our car can also force us to confront 
the uncertainty of the broader social context, which is usually invisible to us, in which the 
machine (and mechanic) are mere parts. Betrayed by our car, we come up against all the 
things we don't know. Is it time for a new vehicle? Did I err in my original purchase? Is 
the mechanic competent, honest and reliable? Is the garage he works for trustworthy? 
Sometimes, too, we must contemplate something worse, something broader and deeper: 
Have the roads now become too dangerous? Have I become (or always been) too 
incompetent? Too scattered and inattentive? Too old? The limitations of all our 
perceptions of things and selves manifest themselves when something we can usually 
depend on in our simplified world breaks down. Then the more complex world that was 
always there, invisible and conveniently ignored, makes its presence known. It is then 
that the walled garden we archetypally inhabit reveals its hidden but ever-present snakes. 

You and I Are Simple Only When the World Behaves 

When things break down, what has been ignored rushes in. When things are no longer 
specified, with precision, the walls crumble, and chaos makes its presence known. When 
we've been careless, and let things slide, what we have refused to attend to gathers itself 
up, adopts a serpentine form, and strikes-often at the worst possible moment. It is then 
that we see what focused intent, precision of aim and careful attention protects us from. 

Imagine a loyal and honest wife suddenly confronted by evidence of her husband's 
infidelity. She has lived alongside him for years. She saw him as she assumes he is: 
reliable, hard-working, loving, dependable. In her marriage, she is standing on a rock, or 
so she believes. But he becomes less attentive and more distracted. He begins, in the 


184 



cliched manner, to work longer hours. Small things she says and does irritate him 
unjustifiably. One day she sees him in a downtown cafe with another woman, interacting 
with her in a manner difficult to rationalize and ignore. The limitations and inaccuracy of 
her former perceptions become immediately and painfully obvious. 

Her theory of her husband collapses. What happens, in consequence? First, something 
-someone-emerges in his stead: a complex, frightening stranger. That's bad enough. 
But it's only half the problem. Her theory of herself collapses, too, in the aftermath of the 
betrayal, so that it's not one stranger that's the problem: it's two. Her husband is not who 
she perceived him to be-but neither is she, the betrayed wife. She is no longer the "well- 
loved, secure wife, and valued partner." Strangely enough, despite our belief in the 
permanent immutability of the past, she may never have been. 

The past is not necessarily what it was, even though it has already been. The present is 
chaotic and indeterminate. The ground shifts continually around her feet, and ours. 
Equally, the future, not yet here, changes into something it was not supposed to be. Is the 
once reasonably content wife now a "deceived innocent"-or a "gullible fool"? Should she 
view herself as victim, or as co-conspirator in a shared delusion? Her husband is-what? 
An unsatisfied lover? A target of seduction? A psychopathic liar? The very Devil himself? 
How could he be so cruel? How could anyone? What is this home she has been living in? 
How could she be so naive? How could anyone? She looks in the mirror. Who is she? 
What's going on? Are any of her relationships real? Have any of them ever been? What has 
happened to the future? Everything is up for grabs, when the deeper realities of the world 
unexpectedly manifest themselves. 

Everything is intricate beyond imagining. Everything is affected by everything else. We 
perceive a very narrow slice of a causally interconnected matrix, although we strive with 
all our might to avoid being confronted by knowledge of that narrowness. The thin veneer 
of perceptual sufficiency cracks, however, when something fundamental goes wrong. The 
dreadful inadequacy of our senses reveals itself. Everything we hold dear crumbles to 
dust. We freeze. We turn to stone. What then do we see? Where can we look, when it is 
precisely what we see that has been insufficient? 

What Do We See When We Don't Know What We're Looking At? 

What is it, that is the world, after the Twin Towers disintegrate? What, if anything, is left 
standing? What dread beast rises from the ruins when the invisible pillars supporting the 
world's financial system tremble and fall? What do we see when we are swept up in the 
fire and drama of a National Socialist rally, or cower, paralyzed with fear, in the midst of a 
massacre in Rwanda? What is it that we see, when we cannot understand what is 
happening to us, cannot determine where we are, know no longer who we are, and no 
longer understand what surrounds us? What we don't see is the well-known and 
comforting world of tools-of useful objects-of personalities. We don't even see familiar 
obstacles-sufficiently troubling though they are in normal times, already mastered-that 
we can simply step around. 

What we perceive, when things fall apart, is no longer the stage and settings of 
habitable order. It's the eternal watery tohu va bohu, formless emptiness, and the tehom, 
the abyss, to speak biblically-the chaos forever lurking beneath our thin surfaces of 
security. It's from that chaos that the Holy Word of God Himself extracted order at the 
beginning of time, according to the oldest opinions expressed by mankind (and it is in the 
image of that same Word that we were made, male and female, according to the same 
opinions). It's from that chaos that whatever stability we had the good fortune to 
experience emerged, originally-for some limited time-when we first learned to 


185 



perceive. It's chaos that we see, when things fall apart (even though we cannot truly see 
it). What does all this mean? 

Emergency-emergence (y). This is the sudden manifestation from somewhere 
unknown of some previously unknown phenomenon (from the Greek phainesthai, to 
"shine forth"). This is the reappearance of the eternal dragon, from its eternal cavern, 
from its now-disrupted slumber. This is the underworld, with its monsters rising from 
the depths. How do we prepare for an emergency, when we do not know what has 
emerged, or from where? How do we prepare for catastrophe, when we do not know what 
to expect, or how to act? We turn from our minds, so to speak-too slow, too ponderous 
-to our bodies. Our bodies react much faster than our minds. 

When things collapse around us our perception disappears, and we act. Ancient 
reflexive responses, rendered automatic and efficient over hundreds of millions of years, 
protect us in those dire moments when not only thought but perception itself fails. Under 
such circumstances, our bodies ready themselves for all possible eventualities. First, 
we freeze. The reflexes of the body then shade into emotion, the next stage of perception. 
Is this something scary? Something useful? Something that must be fought? Something 
that can be ignored? How will we determine this-and when? We don't know. Now we 
are in a costly and demanding state of readiness. Our bodies are flooded with cortisol and 
adrenaline. Our hearts beat faster. Our breath quickens. We realize, painfully, that our 
sense of competence and completeness is gone; it was just a dream. We draw on physical 
and psychological resources saved carefully for just this moment (if we are fortunate 
enough to have them). We prepare for the worst-or the best. We push the gas pedal 
furiously to the floor, and slam on the brakes at the same time. We scream, or laugh. We 
look disgusted, or terrified. We cry. And then we begin to parse apart the chaos. 

And so, the deceived wife, increasingly unhinged, feels the motivation to reveal all-to 
herself, her sister, her best friend, to a stranger on a bus-or retreats into silence, and 
ruminates obsessively, to the same end. What went wrong? What did she do that was so 
unforgivable? Who is this person she has been living with? What kind of world is this, where such 
things can happen? What kind of God would make such a place? What conversation could she 
possibly initiate with this new, infuriating person, inhabiting the shell of her former 
husband? What forms of revenge might satisfy her anger? Who could she seduce, in 
return for this insult? She is by turns enraged, terrified, struck down by pain, and 
exhilarated by the possibilities of her new-found freedom. 

Her last place of bedrock security was in fact not stable, not certain-not bedrock at all. 
Her house was built on a foundation of sand. The ice she was skating on was simply too 
thin. She fell through, into the water below, and is drowning. She has been hit so hard 
that her anger, terror and grief consume her. Her sense of betrayal widens, until the 
whole world caves in. Where is she? In the underworld, with all its terrors. How did she get 
there? This experience, this voyage into the substructure of things-this is all perception, 
too, in its nascent form; this preparation; this consideration of what-might-have-been and 
what-could-still-be; this emotion and fantasy. This is all the deep perception now 
necessary before the familiar objects that she once knew reappear, if they ever do, in their 
simplified and comfortable form. This is perception before the chaos of possibility is re- 
articulated into the functional realities of order. 

"Was it really so unexpected?" she asks herself-she asks others-thinking back. 
Should she now feel guilty about ignoring the warning signs, subtle though they may have 
been, encouraged though she was to avoid them? She remembers when she first married, 
eagerly joining her husband, every single night, to make love. Perhaps that was too much 
to expect-or even too much to cope with-but once, in the last six months? Once every 
two or three months, for years, before that? Would anyone she could truly respect- 
including herself-put up with such a situation? 


186 


There is a story for children, There's No Such Thing as a Dragon, by Jack Kent, that I really 
like. It's a very simple tale, at least on the surface. I once read its few pages to a group of 
retired University of Toronto alumni, and explained its symbolic meaning. It's about a 
small boy, Billy Bixbee, who spies a dragon sitting on his bed one morning. It's about the 
size of a house cat, and friendly. He tells his mother about it, but she tells him that 
there's no such thing as a dragon. So, it starts to grow. It eats all of Billy's pancakes. Soon 
it fills the whole house. Mom tries to vacuum, but she has to go in and out of the house 
through the windows because of the dragon everywhere. It takes her forever. Then, the 
dragon runs off with the house. Billy's dad comes home-and there's just an empty space, 
where he used to live. The mailman tells him where the house went. He chases after it, 
climbs up the dragon's head and neck (now sprawling out into the street) and rejoins his 
wife and son. Mom still insists that the dragon does not exist, but Billy, who's pretty 
much had it by now, insists, "There is a dragon, Mom." Instantly, it starts to shrink. 
Soon, it's cat-sized again. Everyone agrees that dragons of that size (1) exist and (2) are 
much preferable to their gigantic counterparts. Mom, eyes reluctantly opened by this 
point, asks somewhat plaintively why it had to get so big. Billy quietly suggests: "maybe it 
wanted to be noticed." 

Maybe! That's the moral of many, many stories. Chaos emerges in a household, bit by 
bit. Mutual unhappiness and resentment pile up. Everything untidy is swept under the 
rug, where the dragon feasts on the crumbs. But no one says anything, as the shared 
society and negotiated order of the household reveals itself as inadequate, or 
disintegrates, in the face of the unexpected and threatening. Everybody whistles in the 
dark, instead. Communication would require admission of terrible emotions: resentment, 
terror, loneliness, despair, jealousy, frustration, hatred, boredom. Moment by moment, 
it's easier to keep the peace. But in the background, in Billy Bixbee's house, and in all that 
are like it, the dragon grows. One day it bursts forth, in a form that no one can ignore. It 
lifts the very household from its foundations. Then it's an affair, or a decades-long 
custody dispute of ruinous economic and psychological proportions. Then it's the 
concentrated version of the acrimony that could have been spread out, tolerably, issue by 
issue, over the years of the pseudo-paradise of the marriage. Every one of the three 
hundred thousand unrevealed issues, which have been lied about, avoided, rationalized 
away, hidden like an army of skeletons in some great horrific closet, bursts forth like 
Noah's flood, drowning everything. There's no ark, because no one built one, even though 
everyone felt the storm gathering. 

Don't ever underestimate the destructive power of sins of omission. 

Maybe the demolished couple could have had a conversation, or two, or two hundred, 
about their sex lives. Maybe the physical intimacy they undoubtedly shared should have 
been matched, as it often is not, by a corresponding psychological intimacy. Maybe they could 
have fought through their roles. In many households, in recent decades, the traditional 
household division of labour has been demolished, not least in the name of liberation and 
freedom. That demolition, however, has not left so much glorious lack of restriction in its 
wake as chaos, conflict and indeterminacy. The escape from tyranny is often followed not 
by Paradise, but by a sojourn in the desert, aimless, confused and deprived. Furthermore, 
in the absence of agreed-upon tradition (and the constraints-often uncomfortable; often 
even unreasonable-that it imposes) there exist only three difficult options: slavery, 
tyranny or negotiation. The slave merely does what he or she is told-happy, perhaps, to 
shed the responsibility-and solves the problem of complexity in that manner. But it's a 
temporary solution. The spirit of the slave rebels. The tyrant merely tells the slave what 
to do, and solves the problem of complexity in that manner. But it's a temporary solution. 
The tyrant tires of the slave. There's nothing and no one there, except for predictable and 
sullen obedience. Who can live forever with that? But negotiation-that requires 


187 


forthright admission on the part of both players that the dragon exists. That's a reality 
difficult to face, even when it's still too small to simply devour the knight who dares 
confront it. 

Maybe the demolished couple could have more precisely specified their desired manner 
of Being. Maybe in that manner they could have jointly prevented the waters of chaos 
from springing uncontrollably forth and drowning them. Maybe they could have done that 
instead of saying, in the agreeable, lazy and cowardly way: "It's OK. It's not worth 
fighting about." There is little, in a marriage, that is so little that it is not worth fighting 
about. You're stuck in a marriage like the two proverbial cats in a barrel, bound by the 
oath that lasts in theory until one or both of you die. That oath is there to make you take 
the damn situation seriously. Do you really want the same petty annoyance tormenting 
you every single day of your marriage, for the decades of its existence? 

"Oh, I can put up with it," you think. And maybe you should. You're no paragon of 
genuine tolerance. And maybe if you brought up how your partner's giddy laugh is 
beginning to sound like nails on a blackboard he (or she) would tell you, quite properly, 
to go to hell. And maybe the fault is with you, and you should grow up, get yourself 
together and keep quiet. But perhaps braying like a donkey in the midst of a social 
gathering is not reflecting well on your partner, and you should stick to your guns. Under 
such circumstances, there is nothing but a fight-a fight with peace as the goal-that will 
reveal the truth. But you remain silent, and you convince yourself it's because you are a 
good, peace-loving, patient person (and nothing could be further from the truth). And the 
monster under the rug gains a few more pounds. 

Maybe a forthright conversation about sexual dissatisfaction might have been the 
proverbial stitch in time-not that it would be easy. Perhaps madame desired the death of 
intimacy, clandestinely, because she was deeply and secretly ambivalent about sex. God 
knows there's reason to be. Perhaps monsieur was a terrible, selfish lover. Maybe they both 
were. Sorting that out is worth a fight, isn't it? That's a big part of life, isn't it? Perhaps 
addressing that and (you never know) solving the problem would be worth two months 
of pure misery just telling each other the truth (not with intent to destroy, or attain 
victory, because that's not the truth: that's just all-out war). 

Maybe it wasn't sex. Maybe every conversation between husband and wife had 
deteriorated into boring routine, as no shared adventure animated the couple. Maybe that 
deterioration was easier, moment by moment, day by day, than bearing the responsibility 
of keeping the relationship alive. Living things die, after all, without attention. Life is 
indistinguishable from effortful maintenance. No one finds a match so perfect that the 
need for continued attention and work vanishes (and, besides, if you found the perfect 
person, he or she would run away from ever-so-imperfect you in justifiable horror). In 
truth, what you need-what you deserve, after all-is someone exactly as imperfect as 
you. 

Maybe the husband who betrayed his wife was appallingly immature and selfish. Maybe 
that selfishness got the upper hand. Maybe she did not oppose this tendency with enough 
force and vigour. Maybe she could not agree with him on the proper disciplinary approach 
to the children, and shut him out of their lives, in consequence. Maybe that allowed him 
to circumvent what he saw as an unpleasant responsibility. Maybe hatred brewed in the 
hearts of the children, watching this underground battle, punished by the resentment of 
their mother and alienated, bit by bit, from good old Dad. Maybe the dinners she 
prepared for him-or he for her-were cold and bitterly eaten. Maybe all that 
unaddressed conflict left both resentful, in a manner unspoken, but effectively enacted. 
Maybe all that unspoken trouble started to undermine the invisible networks that 
supported the marriage. Maybe respect slowly turned into contempt, and no one deigned 
to notice. Maybe love slowly turned into hate, without mention. 


188 



Everything clarified and articulated becomes visible; maybe neither wife nor husband 
wished to see or understand. Maybe they left things purposefully in the fog. Maybe they 
generated the fog, to hide what they did not want to see. What did missus gain, when she 
turned from mistress to maid or mother? Was it a relief when her sex life disappeared? 
Could she complain more profitably to the neighbours and her mother when her husband 
turned away? Maybe that was more gratifying, secretly, than anything good that could be 
derived from any marriage, no matter how perfect. What can possibly compare to the 
pleasures of sophisticated and well-practised martyrdom? "She's such a saint, and 
married to such a terrible man. She deserved much better." That's a gratifying myth to 
live by, even if unconsciously chosen (the truth of the situation be damned). Maybe she 
never really liked her husband. Maybe she never really liked men, and still doesn't. Maybe 
that was her mother's fault-or her grandmother's. Maybe she mimicked their behaviour, 
acting out their trouble, transmitted unconsciously, implicitly, down the generations. 
Maybe she was taking revenge on her father, or her brother, or society. 

What did her husband gain, for his part, when his sex life at home died? Did he 
willingly play along, as martyr, and complain bitterly to his friends? Did he use it as the 
excuse he wanted anyway to search for a new lover? Did he use it to justify the 
resentment he still felt towards women, in general, for the rejections he had faced so 
continuously before falling into his marriage? Did he seize the opportunity to get 
effortlessly fat and lazy because he wasn't desired, in any case? 

Maybe both, wife and husband alike, used the opportunity to mess up their marriage to 
take revenge upon God (perhaps the one Being who could have sorted through the mess). 

Here's the terrible truth about such matters: every single voluntarily unprocessed and 
uncomprehended and ignored reason for marital failure will compound and conspire and 
will then plague that betrayed and self-betrayed woman for the rest of her life. The same 
goes for her husband. All she-he-they-or we-must do to ensure such an outcome is 
nothing: don't notice, don't react, don't attend, don't discuss, don't consider, don't work for peace, 
don't take responsibility. Don't confront the chaos and turn it into order-just wait, 
anything but naive and innocent, for the chaos to rise up and engulf you instead. 

Why avoid, when avoidance necessarily and inevitably poisons the future? Because the 
possibility of a monster lurks underneath all disagreements and errors. Maybe the fight 
you are having (or not having) with your wife or your husband signifies the beginning of 
the end of your relationship. Maybe your relationship is ending because you are a bad person. 
It's likely, at least in part. Isn't it? Having the argument necessary to solve a real problem 
therefore necessitates willingness to confront two forms of miserable and dangerous 
potential simultaneously: chaos (the potential fragility of the relationship-of all 
relationships-of life itself) and Hell (the fact that you-and your partner-could each be 
the person bad enough to ruin everything with your laziness and spite). There's every 
motivation to avoid. But it doesn't help. 

Why remain vague, when it renders life stagnant and murky? Well, if you don't know 
who you are, you can hide in doubt. Maybe you're not a bad, careless, worthless person. 
Who knows? Not you. Particularly if you refuse to think about it-and you have every 
reason not to. But not thinking about something you don't want to know about doesn't 
make it go away. You are merely trading specific, particular, pointed knowledge of the 
likely finite list of your real faults and flaws for a much longer list of undefined potential 
inadequacies and insufficiencies. 

Why refuse to investigate, when knowledge of reality enables mastery of reality (and if 
not mastery, at least the stature of an honest amateur)? Well, what if there truly is 
something rotten in the state of Denmark? Then what? Isn't it better under such 
conditions to live in willful blindness and enjoy the bliss of ignorance? Well, not if the 
monster is real! Do you truly think it is a good idea to retreat, to abandon the possibility 


189 



of arming yourself against the rising sea of troubles, and to thereby diminish yourself in 
your own eyes? Do you truly think it wise to let the catastrophe grow in the shadows, 
while you shrink and decrease and become ever more afraid? Isn't it better to prepare, to 
sharpen your sword, to peer into the darkness, and then to beard the lion in its den? 
Maybe you'll get hurt. Probably you'll get hurt. Life, after all, is suffering. But maybe the 
wound won't be fatal. 

If you wait instead until what you are refusing to investigate comes a-knocking at your 
door, things will certainly not go so well for you. What you least want will inevitably 
happen-and when you are least prepared. What you least want to encounter will make 
itself manifest when you are weakest and it is strongest. And you will be defeated. 

Turning and turning in the widening gyre 
The falcon cannot hear the falconer; 

Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; 

Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world, 

The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere 
The ceremony of innocence is drowned; 

The best lack all conviction, while the worst 

Are full of passionate intensity. 

(William Butler Yeats, "The Second Coming") 

Why refuse to specify, when specifying the problem would enable its solution? Because to 
specify the problem is to admit that it exists. Because to specify the problem is to allow 
yourself to know what you want, say, from friend or lover-and then you will know, 
precisely and cleanly, when you don't get it, and that will hurt, sharply and specifically. 
But you will learn something from that, and use what you learn in the future-and the 
alternative to that single sharp pain is the dull ache of continued hopelessness and vague 
failure and the sense that time, precious time, is slipping by. 

Why refuse to specify? Because while you are failing to define success (and thereby 
rendering it impossible) you are also refusing to define failure, to yourself, so that if and 
when you fail you won't notice, and it won't hurt. But that won't work! You cannot be 
fooled so easily-unless you have gone very far down the road! You will instead carry 
with you a continual sense of disappointment in your own Being and the self-contempt 
that comes along with that and the increasing hatred for the world that all of that 
generates (or degenerates). 

Surely some revelation is at hand; 

Surely the Second Coming is at hand. 

The Second Coming! Hardly are those words out 
When a vast image out of Spiritus Mundi 
Troubles my sight: somewhere in sands of the desert 
A shape with lion body and the head of a man, 

A gaze blank and pitiless as the sun. 

Is moving its slow thighs, while all about it 
Reel shadows of the indignant desert birds. 

The darkness drops again; but now I know 
That twenty centuries of stony sleep 
Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle, 

And what rough beast, its hour come round at last, 

Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born? 

What if she who has been betrayed, now driven by desperation, is now determined to face 
all the incoherence of past, present and future? What if she decided to sort through the 
mess, even though she has avoided doing so until now, and is all the weaker and more 
confused for it? Perhaps the effort will nearly kill her (but she is now on a path worse 
than death in any case). To re-emerge, to escape, to be reborn, she must thoughtfully 
articulate the reality she comfortably but dangerously left hidden behind a veil of 
ignorance and the pretence of peace. She must separate the particular details of her 
specific catastrophe from the intolerable general condition of Being, in a world where 
everything has fallen apart. Everything-that's far too much. It was specific things that fell 


190 


apart, not everything; identifiable beliefs failed; particular actions were false and inauthentic. 
What were they? How can they be fixed, now? How can she be better, in the future? She 
will never return to dry land if she refuses or is unable to figure it all out. She can put the 
world back together by some precision of thought, some precision of speech, some 
reliance on her word, some reliance on the Word. But perhaps it's better to leave things 
in the fog. Perhaps by now there just isn't enough left of her-perhaps too much of her 
has been left unrevealed, undeveloped. Maybe she simply no longer has the energy.... 

Some earlier care and courage and honesty in expression might have saved her from all 
this trouble. What if she had communicated her unhappiness with the decline of her 
romantic life, right when it started to decline? Precisely, exactly, when that decline first 
bothered her? Or, if it didn't bother her-what if she had instead communicated the fact 
it didn't bother her as much as it perhaps should have? What if she had clearly and 
carefully confronted the fact of our husband's contempt for her household efforts? Would 
she have discovered her resentment of her father and society itself (and the consequent 
contamination of her relationships)? What if she had fixed all that? How much stronger 
would she then have become? How much less likely to avoid facing up to difficulties, in 
consequence? How might she then have served herself, her family, and the world? 

What if she had continually and honestly risked conflict in the present, in the service of 
longer-term truth and peace? What if she had treated the micro-collapses of her marriage 
as evidence of an underlying instability, eminently worthy of attention, instead of 
ignoring them, putting up with them, or smiling through them, in such a nice, agreeable 
manner? Maybe she would be different, and her husband, different too. Maybe they would 
still be married, formally and in spirit. Maybe they would both be much younger, 
physically and mentally, than they are now. Maybe her house would have been founded 
more on rock and less on sand. 

When things fall apart, and chaos re-emerges, we can give structure to it, and re- 
establish order, through our speech. If we speak carefully and precisely, we can sort 
things out, and put them in their proper place, and set a new goal, and navigate to it- 
often communally, if we negotiate; if we reach consensus. If we speak carelessly and 
imprecisely, however, things remain vague. The destination remains unproclaimed. The 
fog of uncertainty does not lift, and there is no negotiating through the world. 

The Construction of Soul and World 

The psyche (the soul) and the world are both organized, at the highest levels of human 
existence, with language, through communication. Things are not as they appear when 
the outcome has been neither intended nor desired. Being has not been sorted into its 
proper categories, when it is not behaving. When something goes wrong, even perception 
itself must be questioned, along with evaluation, thought and action. When error 
announces itself, undifferentiated chaos is at hand. Its reptilian form paralyzes and 
confuses. But dragons, which do exist (perhaps more than anything else exists) also 
hoard gold. In that collapse into the terrible mess of uncomprehended Being lurks the 
possibility of new and benevolent order. Clarity of thought-courageous clarity of thought 
-is necessary to call it forth. 

The problem itself must be admitted to, as close to the time of its emergence as 
possible. "I'm unhappy," is a good start (not "I have a right to be unhappy," because that 
is still questionable, at the beginning of the problem-solving process). Perhaps your 
unhappiness is justified, under the current circumstances. Perhaps any reasonable person 
would be displeased and miserable to be where you are. Alternatively, perhaps, you are 
just whiny and immature? Consider both at least equally probable, as terrible as such 


191 



consideration might appear. Just exactly how immature might you be? There's a 
potentially bottomless pit. But at least you might rectify it, if you can admit to it. 

We parse the complex, tangled chaos, and specify the nature of things, including 
ourselves. It is in this way that our creative, communicative exploration continually 
generates and regenerates the world. We are shaped and informed by what we voluntarily 
encounter, and we shape what we inhabit, as well, in that encounter. This is difficult, but 
the difficulty is not relevant, because the alternative is worse. 

Maybe our errant husband ignored the dinner conversation of his wife because he hated 
his job and was tired and resentful. Maybe he hated his job because his career was forced 
on him by his father and he was too weak or "loyal" to object. Maybe she put up with his 
lack of attention because she believed that forthright objection itself was rude and 
immoral. Maybe she hated her own father's anger and decided, when very young, that all 
aggression and assertiveness were morally wrong. Maybe she thought her husband 
wouldn't love her if she had any opinions of her own. It is very difficult to put such things 
in order-but damaged machinery will continue to malfunction if its problems are neither 
diagnosed nor fixed. 

Wheat from Chaff 

Precision specifies. When something terrible happens, it is precision that separates the 
unique terrible thing that has actually happened from all the other, equally terrible things 
that might have happened-but did not. If you wake up in pain, you might be dying. You 
might be dying slowly and terribly from one of a diverse number of painful, horrible 
diseases. If you refuse to tell your doctor about your pain, then what you have is 
unspecified: it could be any of those diseases-and it certainly (since you have avoided the 
diagnostic conversation-the act of articulation) is something unspeakable. But if you talk 
to your doctor, all those terrible possible diseases will collapse, with luck, into just one 
terrible (or not so terrible) disease, or even into nothing. Then you can laugh at your 
previous fears, and if something really is wrong, well, you're prepared. Precision may 
leave the tragedy intact, but it chases away the ghouls and the demons. 

What you hear in the forest but cannot see might be a tiger. It might even be a 
conspiracy of tigers, each hungrier and more vicious than the other, led by a crocodile. 
But it might not be, too. If you turn and look, perhaps you'll see that it's just a squirrel. (I 
know someone who was actually chased by a squirrel.) Something is out there in the 
woods. You know that with certainty. But often it's only a squirrel. If you refuse to look, 
however, then it's a dragon, and you're no knight: you're a mouse confronting a lion; a 
rabbit, paralyzed by the gaze of a wolf. And I am not saying that it's always a squirrel. 
Often it's something truly terrible. But even what is terrible in actuality often pales in 
significance compared to what is terrible in imagination. And often what cannot be 
confronted because of its horror in imagination can in fact be confronted when reduced to 
its-still-admittedly-terrible actuality. 

If you shirk the responsibility of confronting the unexpected, even when it appears in 
manageable doses, reality itself will become unsustainably disorganized and chaotic. Then 
it will grow bigger and swallow all order, all sense, and all predictability. Ignored reality 
transforms itself (reverts back) into the great Goddess of Chaos, the great reptilian 
Monster of the Unknown-the great predatory beast against which mankind has 
struggled since the dawn of time. If the gap between pretence and reality goes 
unmentioned, it will widen, you will fall into it, and the consequences will not be good. 
Ignored reality manifests itself in an abyss of confusion and suffering. 

Be careful with what you tell yourself and others about what you have done, what you 
are doing, and where you are going. Search for the correct words. Organize those words 


192 



into the correct sentences, and those sentences into the correct paragraphs. The past can 
be redeemed, when reduced by precise language to its essence. The present can flow by 
without robbing the future if its realities are spoken out clearly. With careful thought and 
language, the singular, stellar destiny that justifies existence can be extracted from the 
multitude of murky and unpleasant futures that are far more likely to manifest 
themselves of their own accord. This is how the Eye and the Word make habitable order. 

Don't hide baby monsters under the carpet. They will flourish. They will grow large in 
the dark. Then, when you least expect it, they will jump out and devour you. You will 
descend into an indeterminate, confusing hell, instead of ascending into the heaven of 
virtue and clarity. Courageous and truthful words will render your reality simple, pristine, 
well-defined and habitable. 

If you identify things, with careful attention and language, you bring them forward as 
viable, obedient objects, detaching them from their underlying near-universal 
interconnectedness. You simplify them. You make them specific and useful, and reduce 
their complexity. You make it possible to live with them and use them without dying 
from that complexity, with its attendant uncertainty and anxiety. If you leave things 
vague, then you'll never know what is one thing and what is another. Everything will 
bleed into everything else. This makes the world too complex to be managed. 

You have to consciously define the topic of a conversation, particularly when it is 
difficult-or it becomes about everything, and everything is too much. This is so 
frequently why couples cease communicating. Every argument degenerates into every 
problem that ever emerged in the past, every problem that exists now, and every terrible 
thing that is likely to happen in the future. No one can have a discussion about 
"everything." Instead, you can say, "This exact, precise thing-that is what is making me 
unhappy. This exact, precise thing-that is what I want, as an alternative (although I am 
open to suggestions, if they are specific). This exact, precise thing-that is what you could 
deliver, so that I will stop making your life and mine miserable." But to do that, you have 
to think: What is wrong, exactly ? What do I want, exactly ? You must speak forthrightly and 
call forth the habitable world from chaos. You must use honest precise speech to do that. 
If instead you shrink away and hide, what you are hiding from will transform itself into 
the giant dragon that lurks under your bed and in your forest and in the dark recesses of 
your mind-and it will devour you. 

You must determine where you have been in your life, so that you can know where you 
are now. If you don't know where you are, precisely, then you could be anywhere. 
Anywhere is too many places to be, and some of those places are very bad. You must 
determine where you have been in your life, because otherwise you can't get to where 
you're going. You can't get from point A to point B unless you are already at point A, and 
if you're just "anywhere" the chances you are at point A are very small indeed. 

You must determine where you are going in your life, because you cannot get there 
unless you move in that direction. Random wandering will not move you forward. It will 
instead disappoint and frustrate you and make you anxious and unhappy and hard to get 
along with (and then resentful, and then vengeful, and then worse). 

Say what you mean, so that you can find out what you mean. Act out what you say, so 
you can find out what happens. Then pay attention. Note your errors. Articulate them. 
Strive to correct them. That is how you discover the meaning of your life. That will 
protect you from the tragedy of your life. How could it be otherwise? 

Confront the chaos of Being. Take aim against a sea of troubles. Specify your 
destination, and chart your course. Admit to what you want. Tell those around you who 
you are. Narrow, and gaze attentively, and move forward, forthrightly. 

Be precise in your speech. 


193 




94 

























a 


195 


RULE 11 


DO NOT BOTHER CHILDREN WHEN THEY ARE 
SKATEBOARDING 


DANGER AND MASTERY 

There was a time when kids skateboarded on the west side of Sidney Smith Hall, at the 
University of Toronto, where I work. Sometimes I stood there and watched them. There 
are rough, wide, shallow concrete steps there, leading up from the street to the front 
entrance, accompanied by tubular iron handrails, about two and a half inches in diameter 
and twenty feet long. The crazy kids, almost always boys, would pull back about fifteen 
yards from the top of the steps. Then they would place a foot on their boards, and skate 
like mad to get up some speed. Just before they collided with the handrail, they would 
reach down, grab their board with a single hand and jump onto the top of the rail, 
boardsliding their way down its length, propelling themselves off and landing- 
sometimes, gracefully, still atop their boards, sometimes, painfully, off them. Either way, 
they were soon back at it. 

Some might call that stupid. Maybe it was. But it was brave, too. I thought those kids 
were amazing. I thought they deserved a pat on the back and some honest admiration. Of 
course it was dangerous. Danger was the point. They wanted to triumph over danger. 
They would have been safer in protective equipment, but that would have ruined it. They 
weren't trying to be safe. They were trying to become competent-and it's competence 
that makes people as safe as they can truly be. 

I wouldn't dare do what those kids were doing. Not only that, I couldn't. I certainly 
couldn't climb a construction crane, like a certain type of modern daredevil, evident on 
YouTube (and, of course, people who work on construction cranes). I don't like heights, 
although the twenty-five thousand feet to which airliners ascend is so high that it doesn't 
bother me. I have flown several times in a carbon fibre stunt plane-even doing a 
hammerhead roll-and that was OK, although it's very physically and mentally 
demanding. (To perform a hammerhead roll, you pilot the plane straight up vertically, 
until the force of gravity makes it stall. Then it falls backwards, corkscrewing, until 
eventually it flips and noses straight down, after which you pull out of the dive. Or you 
don't do another hammerhead roll.) But I can't skateboard-especially down handrails- 
and I can't climb cranes. 

Sidney Smith Hall faces another street on the east side. Along that street, named St. 
George-ironically enough-the university installed a series of rough, hard-edged, 
concrete plant boxes, sloping down to the roadway. The kids used to go out there, too, 
and boardslide along the box edges, as they did along the concrete surround of a sculpture 
adjacent to the building. That didn't last very long. Little steel brackets known as 
"skatestoppers" soon appeared, every two or three feet, along those edges. When I first 
saw them, I remembered something that happened in Toronto several years previously. 
Two weeks before elementary school classes started, throughout the city, all the 
playground equipment disappeared. The legislation governing such things had changed, 
and there was a panic about insurability. The playgrounds were hastily removed, even 
though they were sufficiently safe, grandfathered re their insurability, and often paid for 
(and quite recently) by parents. This meant no playgrounds at all for more than a year. 
During this time, I often saw bored but admirable kids charging around on the roof of our 


196 



local school. It was that or scrounge about in the dirt with the cats and the less 
adventurous children. 

I say "sufficiently safe" about the demolished playgrounds because when playgrounds 
are made too safe, kids either stop playing in them or start playing in unintended ways. 
Kids need playgrounds dangerous enough to remain challenging. People, including 
children (who are people too, after all) don't seek to minimize risk. They seek to optimize 
it. They drive and walk and love and play so that they achieve what they desire, but they 
push themselves a bit at the same time, too, so they continue to develop. Thus, if things 
are made too safe, people (including children) start to figure out ways to make them 
dangerous again. 

When untrammeled-and encouraged-we prefer to live on the edge. There, we can 
still be both confident in our experience and confronting the chaos that helps us develop. 
We're hard-wired, for that reason, to enjoy risk (some of us more than others). We feel 
invigorated and excited when we work to optimize our future performance, while playing 
in the present. Otherwise we lumber around, sloth-like, unconscious, unformed and 
careless. Overprotected, we will fail when something dangerous, unexpected and full of 
opportunity suddenly makes its appearance, as it inevitably will. 

The skatestoppers are unattractive. The surround of the nearby sculpture would have to 
have been badly damaged by diligent boardsliders before it would look as mean as it does 
now, studded with metal like a pit bull's collar. The large plant boxes have metal guards 
placed at irregular intervals across their tops, and this, in addition to the wear caused by 
the skateboarders, produces a dismal impression of poor design, resentment and badly 
executed afterthoughts. It gives the area, which was supposed to be beautified by the 
sculpture and vegetation, a generic industrial/prison/mental institution/work-camp look 
of the kind that appears when builders and public officials do not like or trust the people 
they serve. 

The sheer harsh ugliness of the solution makes a lie of the reasons for its 
implementation. 

Success and Resentment 

If you read the depth psychologists-Freud and Jung, for example, as well as their 
precursor, Friedrich Nietzsche-you learn that there is a dark side to everything. Freud 
delved deeply into the latent, implicit content of dreams, which were often aimed, in his 
opinion, at the expression of some improper wish. Jung believed that every act of social 
propriety was accompanied by its evil twin, its unconscious shadow. Nietzsche 
investigated the role played by what he termed ressentiment in motivating what were 
ostensibly selfless actions-and, often, exhibited all too publicly. 

For that man be delivered from revenge-that is for me the bridge to the highest hope, and a rainbow after long 
storms. The tarantulas, of course, would have it otherwise. "What justice means to us is precisely that the world 
be filled with the storms of our revenge"-thus they speak to each other. "We shall wreak vengeange and abuse 
on all whose equals we are not"-thus do the tarantula-hearts vow. "And 'will to equality' shall henceforth be 
the name for virtue; and against all that has power we want to raise our clamor!" You preachers of equality, the 
tyrant-mania of impotence clamors thus out of you for equality: your most secret ambitions to be tyrants thus 
shroud themselves in words of virtue. 

The incomparable English essayist George Orwell knew this sort of thing well. In 1937, 
he wrote The Road to Wigan Pier, which was in part a scathing attack on upper-class British 
socialists (this, despite being inclined towards socialism himself). In the first half of this 
book, Orwell portrays the appalling conditions faced by UK miners in the 1930s: 

Several dentists have told me that in industrial districts a person over thirty with any of his or her own teeth is 
coming to be an abnormality. In Wigan various people gave me their opinion that it is best to get shut of your 
teeth as early in life as possible. 'Teeth is just a misery,' one woman said to me. 


197 


A Wigan Pier coal miner had to walk-crawl would be a better word, given the height of 
the mine shafts-up to three miles, underground, in the dark, banging his head and 
scraping his back, just to get to his seven-and-a-half-hour shift of backbreaking work. 
After that, he crawled back. "It is comparable, perhaps, to climbing a smallish mountain 
before and after your day's work," stated Orwell. None of the time spent crawling was 
paid. 

Orwell wrote The Road to Wigan Pier for the Left Book Club, a socialist publishing group 
that released a select volume every month. After reading the first half of his book, which 
deals directly with the miners' personal circumstances, it is impossible not to feel 
sympathy for the working poor. Only a monster could keep his heart hardened through 
the accounts of the lives Orwell describes: 

It is not long since conditions in the mines were worse than they are now. There are still living a few very old 
women who in their youth have worked underground, crawling on all fours and dragging tubs of coal. They 
used to go on doing this even when they were pregnant. 

In book's second half, however, Orwell turned his gaze to a different problem: the 
comparative unpopularity of socialism in the UK at the time, despite the clear and painful 
inequity observable everywhere. He concluded that the tweed-wearing, armchair- 
philosophizing, victim-identifying, pity-and-contempt-dispensing social-reformer types 
frequently did not like the poor, as they claimed. Instead, they just hated the rich. They 
disguised their resentment and jealousy with piety, sanctimony and self-righteousness. 
Things in the unconscious-or on the social justice-dispensing leftist front-haven't 
changed much, today. It is because of of Freud, Jung, Nietzsche-and Orwell-that I 
always wonder, "What, then, do you stand against?" whenever I hear someone say, too 
loudly, "I stand for this!" The question seems particularly relevant if the same someone is 
complaining, criticizing, or trying to change someone else's behaviour. 

I believe it was Jung who developed the most surgically wicked of psychoanalytic dicta: 
if you cannot understand why someone did something, look at the consequences-and infer the 
motivation. This is a psychological scalpel. It's not always a suitable instrument. It can cut 
too deeply, or in the wrong places. It is, perhaps, a last-resort option. Nonetheless, there 
are times when its application proves enlightening. 

If the consequences of placing skatestoppers on plant-boxes and sculpture bases, for 
example, is unhappy adolescent males and brutalist aesthetic disregard of beauty then, 
perhaps, that was the aim. When someone claims to be acting from the highest principles, 
for the good of others, there is no reason to assume that the person's motives are 
genuine. People motivated to make things better usually aren't concerned with changing 
other people-or, if they are, they take responsibility for making the same changes to 
themselves (and first). Beneath the production of rules stopping the skateboarders from 
doing highly skilled, courageous and dangerous things I see the operation of an insidious 
and profoundly anti-human spirit. 

More about Chris 

My friend Chris, whom I wrote about earlier, was possessed by such a spirit-to the 
serious detriment of his mental health. Part of what plagued him was guilt. He attended 
elementary and junior high school in a number of towns, up in the frigid expanses of the 
northernmost Alberta prairie, prior to ending up in the Fairview I wrote about earlier. 
Fights with Native kids were a too-common part of his experience, during those moves. 
It's no overstatement to point out that such kids were, on average, rougher than the white 
kids, or that they were touchier (and they had their reasons). I knew this well from my 
own experience. 


198 



I had a rocky friendship with a Metis kid, Rene Heck, when I was in elementary 
school. It was rocky because the situation was complex. There was a large cultural divide 
between Rene and me. His clothes were dirtier. He was rougher in speech and attitude. I 
had skipped a grade in school, and was, in addition, small for my age. Rene was a big, 
smart, good-looking kid, and he was tough. We were in grade six together, in a class 
taught by my father. Rene was caught chewing gum. "Rene," said my father, "spit that 
gum out. You look like a cow." "Ha, ha," I laughed, under my breath. "Rene the cow." 
Rene might have been a cow, but there was nothing wrong with his hearing. "Peterson," 
he said, "after school-you're dead." 

Earlier in the morning, Rene and I had arranged to see a movie that night at the local 
movie theatre, the Gem. It looked like that was off. In any case, the rest of the day passed, 
quickly and unpleasantly, as it does when threat and pain lurk. Rene was more than 
capable of giving me a good pounding. After school, I took off for the bike stands outside 
the school as fast as I could, but Rene beat me there. We circled around the bikes, him on 
one side, me on the other. We were characters in a "Keystone Cops" short. As long as I 
kept circling, he couldn't catch me, but my strategy couldn't work forever. I yelled out 
that I was sorry, but he wasn't mollified. His pride was hurt, and he wanted me to pay. 

I crouched down and hid behind some bikes, keeping an eye on Rene. "Rene," I yelled, 
"I'm sorry I called you a cow. Let's quit fighting." He started to approach me again. I said, 
"Rene, I am sorry I said that. Really. And I still want to go to the movie with you." This 
wasn't just a tactic. I meant it. Otherwise what happened next would not have happened. 
Rene stopped circling. Then he stared at me. Then he broke into tears. Then he ran off. 
That was Native-white relationships in a nutshell, in our hard little town. We never did 
go to a movie together. 

When my friend Chris got into it with Native kids, he wouldn't fight back. He didn't 
feel that his self-defence was morally justified, so he took his beatings. "We took their 
land," he later wrote. "That was wrong. No wonder they're angry." Over time, step by 
step, Chris withdrew from the world. It was partly his guilt. He developed a deep hatred 
for masculinity and masculine activity. He saw going to school or working or finding a 
girlfriend as part of the same process that had led to the colonization of North America, 
the horrible nuclear stalemate of the cold war, and the despoiling of the planet. He had 
read some books about Buddhism, and felt that negation of his own Being was ethically 
required, in the light of the current world situation. He came to believe that the same 
applied to others. 

When I was an undergraduate, Chris was, for a while, one of my roommates. One late 
night we went to a local bar. We walked home, afterward. He started to snap the side- 
view mirrors off parked cars, one after the other. I said, "Quit that, Chris. What possible 
good is it going to do to make the people who own these cars miserable?" He told me that 
they were all part of the frenetic human activity that was ruining everything, and that they 
deserved whatever they got. I said that taking revenge on people who were just living 
normal lives was not going to help anything. 

Years later, when I was in graduate school in Montreal, Chris showed up, for what was 
supposed to be a visit. He was aimless, however, and lost. He asked if I could help. He 
ended up moving in. I was married by then, living with my wife, Tammy, and our year-old 
daughter, Mikhaila. Chris had also been friends with Tammy back in Fairview (and held 
out hopes of more than friendship). That complicated the situation even more-but not 
precisely in the manner you might think. Chris started by hating men, but he ended by 
hating women. He wanted them, but he had rejected education, and career, and desire. He 
smoked heavily, and was unemployed. Unsurprisingly, therefore, he was not of much 
interest to women. That made him bitter. I tried to convince him that the path he had 


199 


chosen was only going to lead to further ruin. He needed to develop some humility. He 
needed to get a life. 

One evening, it was Chris's turn to make dinner. When my wife came home, the 
apartment was filled with smoke. Hamburgers were burning furiously in the frying pan. 
Chris was on his hands and knees, attempting to repair something that had come loose 
on the legs of the stove. My wife knew his tricks. She knew he was burning dinner on 
purpose. He resented having to make it. He resented the feminine role (even though the 
household duties were split in a reasonable manner; even though he knew that perfectly 
well). He was fixing the stove to provide a plausible, even creditable excuse for burning 
the food. When she pointed out what he was doing, he played the victim, but he was 
deeply and dangerously furious. Part of him, and not the good part, was convinced that he 
was smarter than anyone else. It was a blow to his pride that she could see through his 
tricks. It was an ugly situation. 

Tammy and I took a walk up towards a local park the next day. We needed to get away 
from the apartment, although it was thirty-five below-bitterly, frigidly cold, humid and 
foggy. It was windy. It was hostile to life. Living with Chris was too much, Tammy said. 
We entered the park. The trees forked their bare branches upward through the damp grey 
air. A black squirrel, tail hairless from mange, gripped a leafless branch, shivered 
violently, struggling to hold on against the wind. What was it doing out there in the cold? 
Squirrels are partial hibernators. They only come out in the winter when it's warm. Then 
we saw another, and another, and another, and another, and another. There were 
squirrels all around us in the park, all partially hairless, tails and bodies alike, all 
windblown on their branches, all shaking and freezing in the deathly cold. No one else 
was around. It was impossible. It was inexplicable. It was exactly appropriate. We were on 
the stage of an absurdist play. It was directed by God. Tammy left soon after with our 
daughter for a few days elsewhere. 

Near Christmas time, that same year, my younger brother and his new wife came out to 
visit from western Canada. My brother also knew Chris. They all put on their winter 
clothes in preparation for a walk around downtown Montreal. Chris put on a long dark 
winter coat. He pulled a black toque, a brimless knitted cap, far down over his head. His 
coat was black, as were his pants and boots. He was very tall, and thin, and somewhat 
stooped. "Chris," I joked. "You look like a serial killer." Ha bloody ha. The three came 
back from their walk. Chris was out of sorts. There were strangers in his territory. 
Another happy couple. It was salt in his wounds. 

We had dinner, pleasantly enough. We talked, and ended the evening. But I couldn't 
sleep. Something wasn't right. It was in the air. At four in the morning, I had had enough. 
I crawled out of bed. I knocked quietly on Chris's door and went without waiting for an 
answer into his room. He was awake on the bed, staring at the ceiling, as I knew he would 
be. I sat down beside him. I knew him very well. I talked him down from his murderous 
rage. Then I went back to bed, and slept. The next morning my brother pulled me aside. 
He wanted to speak with me. We sat down. He said, "What the hell was going on last 
night? I couldn't sleep at all. Was something wrong?" I told my brother that Chris wasn't 
doing so well. I didn't tell him that he was lucky to be alive-that we all were. The spirit 
of Cain had visited our house, but we were left unscathed. 

Maybe I picked up some change in scent that night, when death hung in the air. Chris 
had a very bitter odour. He showered frequently, but the towels and the sheets picked up 
the smell. It was impossible to get them clean. It was the product of a psyche and a body 
that did not operate harmoniously. A social worker I knew, who also knew Chris, told me 
of her familiarity with that odour. Everyone at her workplace knew of it, although they 
only discussed it in hushed tones. They called it the smell of the unemployable. 


200 



Soon after this I finished my post-doctoral studies. Tammy and I moved away from 
Montreal to Boston. We had our second baby. Now and then, Chris and I talked on the 
phone. He came to visit once. It went well. He had found a job at an auto-parts place. He 
was trying to make things better. He was OK at that point. But it didn't last. I didn't see 
him in Boston again. Almost ten years later-the night before Chris's fortieth birthday, as 
it happened-he called me again. By this time, I had moved my family to Toronto. He had 
some news. A story he had written was going to be published in a collection put together 
by a small but legitimate press. He wanted to tell me that. He wrote good short stories. I 
had read them all. We had discussed them at length. He was a good photographer, too. 
He had a good, creative eye. The next day, Chris drove his old pickup-the same battered 
beast from Fairview-into the bush. He ran a hose from the exhaust pipe into the front 
cab. I can see him there, looking through the cracked windshield, smoking, waiting. They 
found his body a few weeks later. I called his dad. "My beautiful boy," he sobbed. 

Recently, I was invited to give a TEDx talk at a nearby university. Another professor 
talked first. He had been invited to speak because of his work-his genuinely fascinating, 
technical work-with computationally intelligent surfaces (like computer touchscreens, 
but capable of being placed everywhere). He spoke instead about the threat human beings 
posed to the survival of the planet. Like Chris-like far too many people-he had become 
anti-human, to the core. He had not walked as far down that road as my friend, but the 
same dread spirit animated them both. 

He stood in front of a screen displaying an endless slow pan of a blocks-long Chinese 
high-tech factory. Hundreds of white-suited workers stood like sterile, inhuman robots 
behind their assembly lines, soundlessly inserting piece A into slot B. He told the 
audience-filled with bright young people-of the decision he and his wife had made to 
limit their number of children to one. He told them it was something they should all 
consider, if they wanted to regard themselves as ethical people. I felt that such a decision 
was properly considered-but only in his particular case (where less than one might have 
been even better). The many Chinese students in attendance sat stolidly through his 
moralizing. They thought, perhaps, of their parents' escape from the horrors of Mao's 
Cultural Revolution and its one-child policy. They thought, perhaps, of the vast 
improvement in living standard and freedom provided by the very same factories. A 
couple of them said as much in the question period that followed. 

Would have the professor reconsidered his opinions, if he knew where such ideas can 
lead? I would like to say yes, but I don't believe it. I think he could have known, but 
refused to. Worse, perhaps: he knew, but didn't care-or knew, and was headed there, 
voluntarily, in any case. 

Self-Appointed Judges of the Human Race 

It has not been long since the Earth seemed infinitely larger than the people who 
inhabited it. It was only in the late 1800s that the brilliant biologist Thomas Huxley 
(1825-95)-staunch defender of Darwin and Aldous Huxley's grandfather-told the 
British Parliament that it was literally impossible for mankind to exhaust the oceans. 
Their power of generation was simply too great, as far as he could determine, compared 
to even the most assiduous human predations. It's been an even shorter fifty years since 
Rachel Carson's Silent Spring ignited the environmental movement. Fifty years! That's 
nothing! That's not even yesterday. 

We've only just developed the conceptual tools and technologies that allow us to 
understand the web of life, however imperfectly. We deserve a bit of sympathy, in 
consequence, for the hypothetical outrage of our destructive behaviour. Sometimes we 
don't know any better. Sometimes we do know better, but haven't yet formulated any 


201 


practical alternatives. It's not as if life is easy for human beings, after all, even now-and 
it's only a few decades ago that the majority of human beings were starving, diseased and 
illiterate. Wealthy as we are (increasingly, everywhere) we still only live decades that 
can be counted on our fingers. Even at present, it is the rare and fortunate family that 
does not contain at least one member with a serious illness-and all will face that 
problem eventually. We do what we can to make the best of things, in our vulnerability 
and fragility, and the planet is harder on us than we are on it. We could cut ourselves 
some slack. 

Human beings are, after all, seriously remarkable creatures. We have no peers, and it's 
not clear that we have any real limits. Things happen now that appeared humanly 
impossible even at the same time in the recent past when we began to wake up to our 
planet-sized responsibilities. A few weeks before writing this I happened across two 
videos juxtaposed on YouTube. One showed the Olympic gold medal vault from 1956; the 
other, the Olympic silver medal vault from 2012. It didn't even look like the same sport- 
or the same animal. What McKayla Maroney did in 2012 would have been considered 
superhuman in the fifties. Parkour, a sport derived from French military obstacle course 
training, is amazing, as is free running. I watch compilations of such performances with 
unabashed admiration. Some of the kids jump off three-storey buildings without injury. 
It's dangerous-and amazing. Crane climbers are so brave it rattles the mind. The same 
goes for extreme mountain bikers, freestyle snowboarders, surfers of fifty-foot waves, and 
skateboarders. 

The boys who shot up Columbine High School, whom we discussed earlier, had 
appointed themselves judges of the human race-like the TEDx professor, although much 
more extreme; like Chris, my doomed friend. For Eric Harris, the more literate of the two 
killers, human beings were a failed and corrupt species. Once a presupposition such as 
that is accepted, its inner logic will inevitably manifest itself. If something is a plague, as 
David Attenborough has it, or a cancer, as the Club of Rome claimed, the person 
who eradicates it is a hero-a veritable planetary saviour, in this case. A real messiah 
might follow through with his rigorous moral logic, and eliminate himself, as well. This is 
what mass murderers, driven by near-infinite resentment, typically do. Even their own 
Being does not justify the existence of humanity. In fact, they kill themselves precisely to 
demonstrate the purity of their commitment to annihilation. No one in the modern world 
may without objection express the opinion that existence would be bettered by the 
absence of Jews, blacks, Muslims, or Englishmen. Why, then, is it virtuous to propose 
that the planet might be better off, if there were fewer people on it? I can't help but see a 
skeletal, grinning face, gleeful at the possibility of the apocalypse, hiding not so very far 
behind such statements. And why does it so often seem to be the very people standing so 
visibly against prejudice who so often appear to feel obligated to denounce humanity 
itself? 

I have seen university students, particularly those in the humanities, suffer genuine 
declines in their mental health from being philosophically berated by such defenders of 
the planet for their existence as members of the human species. It's worse, I think, for 
young men. As privileged beneficiaries of the patriarchy, their accomplishments are 
considered unearned. As possible adherents of rape culture, they're sexually suspect. 
Their ambitions make them plunderers of the planet. They're not welcome. At the junior 
high, high school and university level, they're falling behind educationally. When my son 
was fourteen, we discussed his grades. He was doing very well, he said, matter-of-factly, 
for a boy. I inquired further. Everyone knew, he said, that girls do better in school than 
boys. His intonation indicated surprise at my ignorance of something so self-evident. 
While writing this, I received the latest edition of The Economist. The cover story? "The 


202 


Weaker Sex"-meaning males. In modern universities women now make up more than 
50 percent of the students in more than two-thirds of all disciplines. 

Boys are suffering, in the modern world. They are more disobedient-negatively-or 
more independent-positively-than girls, and they suffer for this, throughout their pre- 
university educational career. They are less agreeable (agreeableness being a personality 
trait associated with compassion, empathy and avoidance of conflict) and less susceptible 
to anxiety and depression, at least after both sexes hit puberty. Boys' interests tilt 
towards things; girls' interests tilt towards people. 1 Strikingly, these differences, 
strongly influenced by biological factors, are most pronounced in the Scandinavian 
societies where gender-equality has been pushed hardest: this is the opposite of what 
would be expected by those who insist, ever more loudly, that gender is a social 
construct. It isn't. This isn't a debate. The data are in. 

Boys like competition, and they don't like to obey, particularly when they are 
adolescents. During that time, they are driven to escape their families, and establish their 
own independent existence. There is little difference between doing that and challenging 
authority. Schools, which were set up in the late 1800s precisely to inculcate 
obedience, do not take kindly to provocative and daring behaviour, no matter how 
tough-minded and competent it might show a boy (or a girl) to be. Other factors play 
their role in the decline of boys. Girls will, for example, play boys' games, but boys are 
much more reluctant to play girls' games. This is in part because it is admirable for a girl 
to win when competing with a boy. It is also OK for her to lose to a boy. For a boy to beat 
a girl, however, it is often not OK-and just as often, it is even less OK for him to lose. 
Imagine that a boy and a girl, aged nine, get into a fight. Just for engaging, the boy is 
highly suspect. If he wins, he's pathetic. If he loses-well, his life might as well be over. 
Beat up by a girl. 

Girls can win by winning in their own hierarchy-by being good at what girls value, as 
girls. They can add to this victory by winning in the boys' hierarchy. Boys, however, can 
only win by winning in the male hierarchy. They will lose status, among girls and boys, by 
being good at what girls value. It costs them in reputation among the boys, and in 
attractiveness among the girls. Girls aren't attracted to boys who are their friends, even 
though they might like them, whatever that means. They are attracted to boys who win 
status contests with other boys. If you're male, however, you just can't hammer a female 
as hard as you would a male. Boys can't (won't) play truly competitive games with girls. It 
isn't clear how they can win. As the game turns into a girls' game, therefore, the boys 
leave. Are the universities-particularly the humanities-about to become a girls' game? 
Is this what we want? 

The situation in the universities (and in educational institutions in general) is far more 
problematic than the basic statistics indicate. If you eliminate the so-called STEM 
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) programs (excluding psychology), 
the female/male ratio is even more skewed. Almost 80 percent of students majoring in 
the fields of healthcare, public administration, psychology and education, which comprise 
one-quarter of all degrees, are female. The disparity is still rapidly increasing. At this rate, 
there will be very few men in most university disciplines in fifteen years. This is not good 
news for men. It might even be catastrophic news for men. But it's also not good news for 
women. 

Career and Marriage 

The women at female-dominated institutes of higher education are finding it increasingly 
difficult to arrange a dating relationship of even moderate duration. In consequence, they 
must settle, if inclined, for a hook-up, or sequential hook-ups. Perhaps this is a move 


203 


forward, in terms of sexual liberation, but I doubt it. I think it's terrible for the girls. A 
stable, loving relationship is highly desirable, for men as well as women. For women, 
however, it is often what is most wanted. From 1997 to 2012, according to the Pew 
Research Centre, the number of women aged 18 to 34 who said that a successful 
marriage is one of the most important things in life rose from 28 to 37 percent (an 
increase of more than 30 percent ). The number of young men who said the same thing 
declined 15 percent over the same period (from 35 to 29 percent ). During that time, 
the proportion of married people over 18 continued to decline, down from three-quarters 
in 1960 to half now.- Finally, among never-married adults aged 30 to 59, men are three 
times as likely as women to say they do not ever want to marry (27 vs 8 percent). 

Who decided, anyway, that career is more important than love and family? Is working 
eighty hours a week at a high-end law firm truly worth the sacrifices required for that 
kind of success? And if it is worth it, why is it worth it? A minority of people (mostly 
men, who score low in the trait of agreeableness, again) are hyper-competitive, and want 
to win at any cost. A minority will find the work intrinsically fascinating. But most aren't, 
and most won't, and money doesn't seem to improve people's lives, once they have 
enough to avoid the bill collectors. Furthermore, most high-performing and high-earning 
females have high-performing and high-earning partners-and that matters more to 
women. The Pew data also indicate that a spouse with a desirable job is a high priority for 
almost 80 percent of never-married but marriage-seeking women (but for less than 50 
percent of men). 

When they hit their thirties, most of the top-rate female lawyers bail out of their high- 
pressure careers. Only 15 percent of equity partners at the two hundred biggest US law 
firms are women. This figure hasn't changed much in the last fifteen years, even 
though female associates and staff attorneys are plentiful. It also isn't because the law 
firms don't want the women to stay around and succeed. There is a chronic shortage of 
excellent people, regardless of sex, and law firms are desperate to retain them. 

The women who leave want a job-and a life-that allows them some time. After law 
school and articling and the few first years of work, they develop other interests. This is 
common knowledge in the big firms (although it is not something that people are 
comfortable articulating in public, men and women alike). I recently watched a McGill 
University professor, female, lecture a room full of female law partners or near-partners 
about how lack of childcare facilities and "male definitions of success" impeded their 
career progress and caused women to leave. I knew most of the women in the room. We 
had talked at great length. I knew they knew that none of this was at all the problem. 
They had nannies, and they could afford them. They had already outsourced all their 
domestic obligations and necessities. They understood, as well-and perfectly well-that 
it was the market that defined success, not the men they worked with. If you are earning 
$650 an hour in Toronto as a top lawyer, and your client in Japan phones you at 4 a.m. on 
a Sunday, you answer. Now. You answer, now, even if you have just gone back to sleep 
after feeding the baby. You answer because some hyper-ambitious legal associate in New 
York would be happy to answer, if you don't-and that's why the market defines the 
work. 

The increasingly short supply of university-educated men poses a problem of increasing 
severity for women who want to marry, as well as date. First, women have a strong 
proclivity to marry across or up the economic dominance hierarchy. They prefer a partner 
of equal or greater status. This holds true cross-culturally. The same does not hold, by 
the way, for men, who are perfectly willing to marry across or down (as the Pew data 
indicate), although they show a preference for somewhat younger mates. The recent trend 
towards the hollowing-out of the middle class has also been increasing as resource-rich 


204 


women tend more and more to partner with resource-rich men. Because of this, and 
because of the decline in high-paying manufacturing jobs for men (one of six men of 
employable age is currently without work in the US), marriage is now something 
increasingly reserved for the rich. I can't help finding that amusing, in a blackly ironic 
manner. The oppressive patriarchal institution of marriage has now become a luxury. 
Why would the rich tyrannize themselves? 

Why do women want an employed partner and, preferably, one of higher status? In no 
small part, it's because women become more vulnerable when they have children. They 
need someone competent to support mother and child when that becomes necessary. It's 
a perfectly rational compensatory act, although it may also have a biological basis. Why 
would a woman who decides to take responsibility for one or more infants want an adult 
to look after as well? So, the unemployed working man is an undesirable specimen-and 
single motherhood an undesirable alternative. Children in father-absent homes are four 
times as likely to be poor. That means their mothers are poor too. Fatherless children are 
at much greater risk for drug and alcohol abuse. Children living with married biological 
parents are less anxious, depressed and delinquent than children living with one or more 
non-biological parent. Children in single-parent families are also twice as likely to commit 
suicide. 

The strong turn towards political correctness in universities has exacerbated the 
problem. The voices shouting against oppression have become louder, it seems, in precise 
proportion to how equal-even now increasingly skewed against men-the schools have 
become. There are whole disciplines in universities forthrightly hostile towards men. 
These are the areas of study, dominated by the postmodern/neo-Marxist claim that 
Western culture, in particular, is an oppressive structure, created by white men to 
dominate and exclude women (and other select groups); successful only because of that 
domination and exclusion. 

The Patriarchy: Help or Hindrance? 

Of course, culture is an oppressive structure. It's always been that way. It's a fundamental, 
universal existential reality. The tyrannical king is a symbolic truth; an archetypal 
constant. What we inherit from the past is willfully blind, and out of date. It's a ghost, a 
machine, and a monster. It must be rescued, repaired and kept at bay by the attention and 
effort of the living. It crushes, as it hammers us into socially acceptable shape, and it 
wastes great potential. But it offers great gain, too. Every word we speak is a gift from our 
ancestors. Every thought we think was thought previously by someone smarter. The 
highly functional infrastructure that surrounds us, particularly in the West, is a gift from 
our ancestors: the comparatively uncorrupt political and economic systems, the 
technology, the wealth, the lifespan, the freedom, the luxury, and the opportunity. 
Culture takes with one hand, but in some fortunate places it gives more with the other. 
To think about culture only as oppressive is ignorant and ungrateful, as well as 
dangerous. This is not to say (as I am hoping the content of this book has made 
abundantly clear, so far) that culture should not be subject to criticism. 

Consider this, as well, in regard to oppression: any hierarchy creates winners and losers. The 
winners are, of course, more likely to justify the hierarchy and the losers to criticize it. 
But (1) the collective pursuit of any valued goal produces a hierarchy (as some will be 
better and some worse at that pursuit not matter what it is) and (2) it is the pursuit of 
goals that in large part lends life its sustaining meaning. We experience almost all the 
emotions that make life deep and engaging as a consequence of moving successfully 
towards something deeply desired and valued. The price we pay for that involvement is 
the inevitable creation of hierarchies of success, while the inevitable consequence is 


205 


difference in outcome. Absolute equality would therefore require the sacrifice of value 
itself-and then there would be nothing worth living for. We might instead note with 
gratitude that a complex, sophisticated culture allows for many games and many 
successful players, and that a well-structured culture allows the individuals that compose 
it to play and to win, in many different fashions. 

It is also perverse to consider culture the creation of men. Culture is symbolically, 
archetypally, mythically male. That's partly why the idea of "the patriarchy" is so easily 
swallowed. But it is certainly the creation of humankind, not the creation of men (let 
alone white men, who nonetheless contributed their fair share). European culture has 
only been dominant, to the degree that it is dominant at all, for about four hundred years. 
On the time scale of cultural evolution-which is to be measured, at minimum, in 
thousands of years-such a timespan barely registers. Furthermore, even if women 
contributed nothing substantial to art, literature and the sciences prior to the 1960s and 
the feminist revolution (which is not something I believe), then the role they played 
raising children and working on the farms was still instrumental in raising boys and 
freeing up men-a very few men-so that humanity could propagate itself and strive 
forward. 

Here's an alternative theory: throughout history, men and women both struggled 
terribly for freedom from the overwhelming horrors of privation and necessity. Women 
were often at a disadvantage during that struggle, as they had all the vulnerabilities of 
men, with the extra reproductive burden, and less physical strength. In addition to the 
filth, misery, disease, starvation, cruelty and ignorance that characterized the lives of both 
sexes, back before the twentieth century (when even people in the Western world 
typically existed on less than a dollar a day in today's money) women also had to put up 
with the serious practical inconvenience of menstruation, the high probability of 
unwanted pregnancy, the chance of death or serious damage during childbirth, and the 
burden of too many young children. Perhaps that is sufficient reason for the different 
legal and practical treatment of men and women that characterized most societies prior to 
the recent technological revolutions, including the invention of the birth control pill. At 
least such things might be taken into account, before the assumption that men tyrannized 
women is accepted as a truism. 

It looks to me like the so-called oppression of the patriarchy was instead an imperfect 
collective attempt by men and women, stretching over millennia, to free each other from 
privation, disease and drudgery. The recent case of Arunachalam Muruganantham 
provides a salutary example. This man, the "tampon king" of India, became unhappy 
because his wife had to use dirty rags during her menstrual period. She told him it was 
either expensive sanitary napkins, or milk for the family. He spent the next fourteen years 
in a state of insanity, by his neighbours' judgment, trying to rectify the problem. Even his 
wife and his mother abandoned him, briefly, terrified as they became of his obsession. 
When he ran out of female volunteers to test his product, he took to wearing a bladder of 
pig's blood as a replacement. I can't see how this behaviour would have improved his 
popularity or status. Now his low-cost and locally made napkins are distributed across 
India, manufactured by women-run self-help groups. His users have been provided with 
freedom they never previously experienced. In 2014, this high-school dropout was named 
one of Time magazine's 100 most influential people in the world. I am unwilling to 
consider personal gain Muruganantham's primary motivation. Is he part of the patriarchy? 

In 1847, James Young Simpson used ether to help a woman who had a deformed pelvis 
give birth. Afterwards, he switched to the better-performing chloroform. The first baby 
delivered under its influence was named "Anaesthesia." By 1853, chloroform was 
esteemed enough to be used by Queen Victoria, who delivered her seventh baby under its 
influence. Remarkably soon afterward, the option of painless childbirth was available 


206 



everywhere. A few people warned of the danger of opposing God's pronouncement to 
women in Genesis 3:16: "I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow 
thou shalt bring forth children ..." Some also opposed its use among males: young, 
healthy, courageous men simply did not need anaesthesia. Such opposition was 
ineffectual. Use of anaesthesia spread with extreme rapidity (and far faster than would be 
possible today). Even prominent churchmen supported its use. 

The first practical tampon, Tampax, didn't arrive until the 1930s. It was invented by Dr. 
Earle Cleveland Haas. He made it of compressed cotton, and designed an applicator from 
paper tubes. This helped lessen resistance to the products by those who objected to the 
self-touching that might otherwise occur. By the early 1940s, 25 percent of women were 
using them. Thirty years later, it was 70 percent. Now it's four out of five, with the 
remainder relying on pads, which are now hyper-absorbent, and held in place by effective 
adhesives (opposed to the awkwardly placed, bulky, belted, diaper-like sanitary napkins of 
the 1970s). Did Muruganantham, Simpson and Haas oppress women, or free them? What 
about Gregory Goodwin Pincus, who invented the birth control pill? In what manner were 
these practical, enlightened, persistent men part of a constricting patriarchy? 

Why do we teach our young people that our incredible culture is the result of male 
oppression? Blinded by this central assumption disciplines as diverse as education, social 
work, art history, gender studies, literature, sociology and, increasingly, law actively treat 
men as oppressors and men's activity as inherently destructive. They also often directly 
promote radical political action-radical by all the norms of the societies within which 
they are situated-which they do not distinguish from education. The Pauline Jewett 
Institute of Women's and Gender Studies at Ottawa's Carleton University, for example, 
encourages activism as part of their mandate. The Gender Studies Department at Queen's 
University in Kingston, Ontario, "teaches feminist, anti-racist, and queer theories and 
methods that centre activism for social change"-indicating support for the supposition 
that university education should above all foster political engagement of a particular kind. 

Postmodernism and the Long Arm of Marx 

These disciplines draw their philosophy from multiple sources. All are heavily influenced 
by the Marxist humanists. One such figure is Max Horkheimer, who developed critical 
theory in the 1930s. Any brief summary of his ideas is bound to be oversimplified, but 
Horkheimer regarded himself as a Marxist. He believed that Western principles of 
individual freedom or the free market were merely masks that served to disguise the true 
conditions of the West: inequality, domination and exploitation. He believed that 
intellectual activity should be devoted to social change, instead of mere understanding, 
and hoped to emancipate humanity from its enslavement. Horkheimer and his Frankfurt 
School of associated thinkers-first, in Germany and later, in the US-aimed at a full- 
scale critique and transformation of Western civilization. 

More important in recent years has been the work of French philosopher Jacques 
Derrida, leader of the postmodernists, who came into vogue in the late 1970s. Derrida 
described his own ideas as a radicalized form of Marxism. Marx attempted to reduce 
history and society to economics, considering culture the oppression of the poor by the 
rich. When Marxism was put into practice in the Soviet Union, China, Vietnam, 
Cambodia and elsewhere, economic resources were brutally redistributed. Private 
property was eliminated, and rural people forcibly collectivized. The result? Tens of 
millions of people died. Hundreds of millions more were subject to oppression rivalling 
that still operative in North Korea, the last classic communist holdout. The resulting 
economic systems were corrupt and unsustainable. The world entered a prolonged and 
extremely dangerous cold war. The citizens of those societies lived the life of the lie, 


207 



betraying their families, informing on their neighbours-existing in misery, without 
complaint (or else). 

Marxist ideas were very attractive to intellectual Utopians. One of the primary architects 
of the horrors of the Khmer Rouge, Khieu Samphan, received a doctorate at the Sorbonne 
before he became the nominal head of Cambodia in the mid-1970s. In his doctoral thesis, 
written in 1959, he argued that the work done by non-farmers in Cambodia's cities was 
unproductive: bankers, bureaucrats and businessmen added nothing to society. Instead, 
they parasitized the genuine value produced through agriculture, small industry and craft. 
Samphan's ideas were favourably looked upon by the French intellectuals who granted 
him his Ph.D. Back in Cambodia, he was provided with the opportunity to put his 
theories into practice. The Khmer Rouge evacuated Cambodia's cities, drove all the 
inhabitants into the countryside, closed the banks, banned the use of currency, and 
destroyed all the markets. A quarter of the Cambodian population were worked to death 
in the countryside, in the killing fields. 

Lest We Forget: Ideas Have Consequences. 

When the communists established the Soviet Union after the First World War, people 
could be forgiven for hoping that the utopian collectivist dreams their new leaders 
purveyed were possible. The decayed social order of the late nineteenth century produced 
the trenches and mass slaughters of the Great War. The gap between rich and poor was 
extreme, and most people slaved away in conditions worse than those later described by 
Orwell. Although the West received word of the horror perpetrated by Lenin after the 
Russian Revolution, it remained difficult to evaluate his actions from afar. Russia was in 
post-monarchical chaos, and the news of widespread industrial development and 
redistribution of property to those who had so recently been serfs provided reason for 
hope. To complicate things further, the USSR (and Mexico) supported the democratic 
Republicans when the Spanish Civil War broke out, in 1936. They were fighting against 
the essentially fascist Nationalists, who had overthrown the fragile democracy established 
only five years previously, and who found support with the Nazis and Italian fascists. 

The intelligentsia in America, Great Britain and elsewhere were severely frustrated by 
their home countries' neutrality. Thousands of foreigners streamed into Spain to fight for 
the Republicans, serving in the International Brigades. George Orwell was one of them. 
Ernest Hemingway served there as a journalist, and was a supporter of the Republicans. 
Politically concerned young Americans, Canadians and Brits felt a moral obligation to 
stop talking and start fighting. 

All of this drew attention away from concurrent events in the Soviet Union. In the 
1930s, during the Great Depression, the Stalinist Soviets sent two million kulaks, their 
richest peasants, to Siberia (those with a small number of cows, a couple of hired hands, 
or a few acres more than was typical). From the communist viewpoint, these kulaks had 
gathered their wealth by plundering those around them, and deserved their fate. Wealth 
signified oppression, and private property was theft. It was time for some equity. More 
than thirty thousand kulaks were shot on the spot. Many more met their fate at the hands 
of their most jealous, resentful and unproductive neighbours, who used the high ideals of 
communist collectivization to mask their murderous intent. 

The kulaks were "enemies of the people," apes, scum, vermin, filth and swine. "We will 
make soap out of the kulak," claimed one particularly brutal cadre of city-dwellers, 
mobilized by party and Soviet executive committees, and sent out into the countryside. 
The kulaks were driven, naked, into the streets, beaten, and forced to dig their own 
graves. The women were raped. Their belongings were "expropriated," which, in practice, 
meant that their houses were stripped down to the rafters and ceiling beams and 


208 



everything was stolen. In many places, the non-kulak peasants resisted, particularly the 
women, who took to surrounding the persecuted families with their bodies. Such 
resistance proved futile. The kulaks who didn't die were exiled to Siberia, often in the 
middle of the night. The trains started in February, in the bitter Russian cold. Housing of 
the most substandard kind awaited them upon arrival on the desert taiga. Many died, 
particularly children, from typhoid, measles and scarlet fever. 

The "parasitical" kulaks were, in general, the most skillful and hardworking farmers. A 
small minority of people are responsible for most of the production in any field, and 
farming proved no different. Agricultural output crashed. What little remained was taken 
by force out of the countryside and into the cities. Rural people who went out into the 
fields after the harvest to glean single grains of wheat for their hungry families risked 
execution. Six million people died of starvation in the Ukraine, the breadbasket of the 
Soviet Union, in the 1930s. "To eat your own children is a barbarian act," declared 
posters of the Soviet regime. 

Despite more than mere rumours of such atrocities, attitudes towards communism 
remained consistently positive among many Western intellectuals. There were other 
things to worry about, and the Second World War allied the Soviet Union with the 
Western countries opposing Hitler, Mussolini and Hirohito. Certain watchful eyes 
remained open, nonetheless. Malcolm Muggeridge published a series of articles describing 
Soviet demolition of the peasantry as early as 1933, for the Manchester Guardian. George 
Orwell understood what was going on under Stalin, and he made it widely known. He 
published Animal Farm, a fable satirizing the Soviet Union, in 1945, despite encountering 
serious resistance to the book's release. Many who should have known better retained 
their blindness for long after this. Nowhere was this truer than France, and nowhere truer 
in France than among the intellectuals. 

France's most famous mid-century philosopher, Jean-Paul Sartre, was a well-known 
communist, although not a card-carrier, until he denounced the Soviet incursion into 
Hungary in 1956. He remained an advocate for Marxism, nonetheless, and did not finally 
break with the Soviet Union until 1968, when the Soviets violently suppressed the 
Czechoslovakians during the Prague Spring. 

Not long after came the publication of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's The Gulag Archipelago, 
which we have discussed rather extensively in previous chapters. As noted (and is worth 
noting again), this book utterly demolished communism's moral credibility-first in the 
West, and then in the Soviet System itself. It circulated in underground samizdat format. 
Russians had twenty-four hours to read their rare copy before handing it to the next 
waiting mind. A Russian-language reading was broadcast into the Soviet Union by Radio 
Liberty. 

Solzhenitsyn argued that the Soviet system could have never survived without tyranny 
and slave labour; that the seeds of its worst excesses were definitively sowed in the time 
of Lenin (for whom the Western communists still served as apologists); and that it was 
propped up by endless lies, both individual and public. Its sins could not be blamed on a 
simple cult of personality, as its supporters continued to claim. Solzhenitsyn documented 
the Soviet Union's extensive mistreatment of political prisoners, its corrupt legal system, 
and its mass murders, and showed in painstaking detail how these were not aberrations 
but direct expressions of the underlying communist philosophy. No one could stand up 
for communism after The Gulag Archipelago -not even the communists themselves. 

This did not mean that the fascination Marxist ideas had for intellectuals-particularly 
French intellectuals-disappeared. It merely transformed. Some refused outright to learn. 
Sartre denounced Solzhenitsyn as a "dangerous element." Derrida, more subtle, 
substituted the idea of power for the idea of money, and continued on his merry way. 
Such linguistic sleight-of-hand gave all the barely repentant Marxists still inhabiting the 


209 



intellectual pinnacles of the West the means to retain their world-view. Society was no 
longer repression of the poor by the rich. It was oppression of everyone by the powerful. 

According to Derrida, hierarchical structures emerged only to include (the beneficiaries 
of that structure) and to exclude (everyone else, who were therefore oppressed). Even 
that claim wasn't sufficiently radical. Derrida claimed that divisiveness and oppression 
were built right into language-built into the very categories we use to pragmatically 
simplify and negotiate the world. There are "women" only because men gain by excluding 
them. There are "males and females" only because members of that more heterogeneous 
group benefit by excluding the tiny minority of people whose biological sexuality is 
amorphous. Science only benefits the scientists. Politics only benefits the politicians. In 
Derrida's view, hierarchies exist because they gain from oppressing those who are 
omitted. It is this ill-gotten gain that allows them to flourish. 

Derrida famously said (although he denied it, later): "II n'y a pas de hors-texte"-often 
translated as "there is nothing outside the text." His supporters say that is a 
mistranslation, and that the English equivalent should have been "there is no outside- 
text." It remains difficult, either way, to read the statement as saying anything other than 
"everything is interpretation," and that is how Derrida's work has generally been 
interpreted. 

It is almost impossible to over-estimate the nihilistic and destructive nature of this 
philosophy. It puts the act of categorization itself in doubt. It negates the idea that 
distinctions might be drawn between things for any reasons other than that of raw power. 
Biological distinctions between men and women? Despite the existence of an 
overwhelming, multi-disciplinary scientific literature indicating that sex differences are 
powerfully influenced by biological factors, science is just another game of power, for 
Derrida and his post-modern Marxist acolytes, making claims to benefit those at the 
pinnacle of the scientific world. There are no facts. Hierarchical position and reputation as 
a consequence of skill and competence? All definitions of skill and of competence are 
merely made up by those who benefit from them, to exclude others, and to benefit 
personally and selfishly. 

There is sufficient truth to Derrida's claims to account, in part, for their insidious 
nature. Power is a fundamental motivational force ("a," not "the"). People compete to 
rise to the top, and they care where they are in dominance hierarchies. But (and this is 
where you separate the metaphorical boys from the men, philosophically) the fact that 
power plays a role in human motivation does not mean that it plays the only role, or even the 
primary role. Likewise, the fact that we can never know everything does make all our 
observations and utterances dependent on taking some things into account and leaving 
other things out (as we discussed extensively in Rule 10). That does not justify the claim 
that everything is interpretation, or that categorization is just exclusion. Beware of single 
cause interpretations-and beware the people who purvey them. 

Although the facts cannot speak for themselves (just as an expanse of land spread out 
before a voyager cannot tell him how to journey through it), and although there are a 
myriad ways to interact with-even to perceive-even a small number of objects, that 
does not mean that all interpretations are equally valid. Some hurt-yourself and others. 
Others put you on a collision course with society. Some are not sustainable across time. 
Others do not get you where you want to go. Many of these constraints are built in to us, 
as a consequence of billions of years of evolutionary processes. Others emerge as we are 
socialized into cooperating and competing peacefully and productively with others. Still 
more interpretations emerge as we discard counterproductive strategies through learning. 
An endless number of interpretations, certainly: that is not different than saying an 
endless number of problems. But a seriously bounded number of viable solutions. Otherwise life 
would be easy. And it's not. 


210 



Now, I have some beliefs that might be regarded as left-leaning. I think, for example, 
that the tendency for valuable goods to distribute themselves with pronounced inequality 
constitutes an ever-present threat to the stability of society. I think there is good evidence 
for that. That does not mean that the solution to the problem is self-evident. We don't 
know how to redistribute wealth without introducing a whole host of other problems. 
Different Western societies have tried different approaches. The Swedes, for example, 
push equality to its limit. The US takes the opposite tack, assuming that the net wealth- 
creation of a more free-for-all capitalism constitutes the rising tide that lifts all boats. The 
results of these experiments are not all in, and countries differ very much in relevant 
ways. Differences in history, geographic area, population size and ethnic diversity make 
direct comparisons very difficult. But it certainly is the case that forced redistribution, in 
the name of utopian equality, is a cure to shame the disease. 

I think, as well (on what might be considered the leftish side), that the incremental 
remake of university administrations into analogues of private corporations is a mistake. I 
think that the science of management is a pseudo-discipline. I believe that government 
can, sometimes, be a force for good, as well as the necessary arbiter of a small set of 
necessary rules. Nonetheless, I do not understand why our society is providing public 
funding to institutions and educators whose stated, conscious and explicit aim is the 
demolition of the culture that supports them. Such people have a perfect right to their 
opinions and actions, if they remain lawful. But they have no reasonable claim to public 
funding. If radical right-wingers were receiving state funding for political operations 
disguised as university courses, as the radical left-wingers clearly are, the uproar from 
progressives across North America would be deafening. 

There are other serious problems lurking in the radical disciplines, apart from the 
falseness of their theories and methods, and their insistence that collective political 
activism is morally obligatory. There isn't a shred of hard evidence to support any of their 
central claims: that Western society is pathologically patriarchal; that the prime lesson of 
history is that men, rather than nature, were the primary source of the oppression of 
women (rather than, as in most cases, their partners and supporters); that all hierarchies 
are based on power and aimed at exclusion. Hierarchies exist for many reasons-some 
arguably valid, some not-and are incredibly ancient, evolutionarily speaking. Do male 
crustaceans oppress female crustaceans? Should their hierarchies be upended? 

In societies that are well-functioning-not in comparison to a hypothetical utopia, but 
contrasted with other existing or historical cultures- competence, not power, is a prime 
determiner of status. Competence. Ability. Skill. Not power. This is obvious both 
anecdotally and factually. No one with brain cancer is equity-minded enough to refuse the 
service of the surgeon with the best education, the best reputation and, perhaps, the 
highest earnings. Furthermore, the most valid personality trait predictors of long-term 
success in Western countries are intelligence (as measured with cognitive ability or IQ 
tests) and conscientiousness (a trait characterized by industriousness and orderliness).- 
There are exceptions. Entrepreneurs and artists are higher in openness to experience, 
another cardinal personality trait, than in conscientiousness. But openness is associated 
with verbal intelligence and creativity, so that exception is appropriate and 
understandable. The predictive power of these traits, mathematically and economically 
speaking, is exceptionally high-among the highest, in terms of power, of anything ever 
actually measured at the harder ends of the social sciences. A good battery of 
personality/cognitive tests can increase the probability of employing someone more 
competent than average from 50:50 to 85:15. These are the facts, as well supported as 
anything in the social sciences (and this is saying more than you might think, as the social 
sciences are more effective disciplines than their cynical critics appreciate). Thus, not only 
is the state supporting one-sided radicalism, it is also supporting indoctrination. We do 


211 


not teach our children that the world is flat. Neither should we teach them unsupported 
ideologically-predicated theories about the nature of men and women-or the nature of 
hierarchy. 

It is not unreasonable to note (if the deconstructionists would leave it at that) that 
science can be biased by the interests of power, and to warn against that-or to point out 
that evidence is too often what powerful people, including scientists, decide it is. After all, 
scientists are people too, and people like power, just like lobsters like power-just like 
deconstructionists like to be known for their ideas, and strive rightly to sit atop their 
academic hierarchies. But that doesn't mean that science-or even deconstructionism-is 
only about power. Why believe such a thing? Why insist upon it? Perhaps it's this: if only 
power exists, then the use of power becomes fully justifiable. There is no bounding such use by 
evidence, method, logic, or even the necessity for coherence. There is no bounding by 
anything "outside the text." That leaves opinion-and force-and the use of force is all 
too attractive, under such circumstances, just as its employment in the service of that 
opinion is all too certain. The insane and incomprehensible postmodern insistence that all 
gender differences are socially constructed, for example, becomes all too understandable 
when its moral imperative is grasped-when its justification for force is once and for all 
understood: Society must be altered, or bias eliminated, until all outcomes are equitable. But the 
bedrock of the social constructionist position is the wish for the latter, not belief in the 
justice of the former. Since all outcome inequalities must be eliminated (inequality being 
the heart of all evil), then all gender differences must be regarded as socially constructed. 
Otherwise the drive for equality would be too radical, and the doctrine too blatantly 
propagandistic. Thus, the order of logic is reversed, so that the ideology can be 
camouflaged. The fact that such statements lead immediately to internal inconsistencies 
within the ideology is never addressed. Gender is constructed, but an individual who 
desires gender re-assignment surgery is to be unarguably considered a man trapped in a 
woman's body (or vice versa). The fact that both of these cannot logically be true, simultaneously, 
is just ignored (or rationalized away with another appalling post-modern claim: that logic 
itself-along with the techniques of science-is merely part of the oppressive patriarchal 
system). 

It is also the case, of course, that all outcomes cannot be equalized. First, outcomes 
must be measured. Comparing the salaries of people who occupy the same position is 
relatively straightforward (although complicated significantly by such things as date of 
hire, given the difference in demand for workers, for example, at different time periods). 
But there are other dimensions of comparison that are arguably equally relevant, such as 
tenure, promotion rate, and social influence. The introduction of the "equal pay for equal 
work" argument immediately complicates even salary comparison beyond practicality, for 
one simple reason: who decides what work is equal? It's not possible. That's why the 
marketplace exists. Worse is the problem of group comparison: women should make as 
much as men. OK. Black women should make as much as white women. OK. Should 
salary then be adjusted for all parameters of race? At what level of resolution? What racial 
categories are "real"? 

The U.S. National Institute of Health, to take a single bureaucratic example, recognizes 
American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Black, Hispanic, Native Hawaiian or other 
Pacific Islander, and White. But there are more than five hundred separate American 
Indian tribes. By what possible logic should "American Indian" therefore stand as a 
canonical category? Osage tribal members have a yearly average income of $3OK, while 
Tohono O'odham's make $11K. Are they equally oppressed? What about disabilities? 
Disabled people should make as much as non-disabled people. OK. On the surface, that's 
a noble, compassionate, fair claim. But who is disabled? Is someone living with a parent 
with Alzheimer's disabled? If not, why not? What about someone with a lower IQ? 


212 



Someone less attractive? Someone overweight? Some people clearly move through life 
markedly overburdened with problems that are beyond their control, but it is a rare 
person indeed who isn't suffering from at least one serious catastrophe at any given time 
-particularly if you include their family in the equation. And why shouldn't you? Here's 
the fundamental problem: group identity can be fractionated right down to the level of the 
individual. That sentence should be written in capital letters. Every person is unique-and 
not just in a trivial manner: importantly, significantly, meaningfully unique. Group 
membership cannot capture that variability. Period. 

None of this complexity is ever discussed by the postmodern/Marxist thinkers. Instead, 
their ideological approach fixes a point of truth, like the North Star, and forces everything 
to rotate around it. The claim that all gender differences are a consequence of 
socialization is neither provable, nor disprovable, in some sense, because culture can be 
brought to bear with such force on groups or individuals that virtually any outcome is 
attainable, if we are willing to bear the cost. We know, for example, from studies of 
adopted-out identical twins, that culture can produce a fifteen-point (or one standard 
deviation) increase in IQ (roughly the difference between the average high school student 
and the average state college student) at the cost of a three-standard-deviation increase in 
wealth. What this means, approximately, is that two identical twins, separated at birth, 
will differ in IQ by fifteen points if the first twin is raised in a family that is poorer than 
85 percent of families and the second is raised in a family richer than 95 percent of 
families. Something similar has recently been demonstrated with education, rather than 
wealth. We don't know what it would cost in wealth or differential education to 
produce a more extreme transformation. 

What such studies imply is that we could probably minimize the innate differences 
between boys and girls, if we were willing to exert enough pressure. This would in no way 
ensure that we were freeing people of either gender to make their own choices. But choice 
has no place in the ideological picture: if men and women act, voluntarily, to produce 
gender-unequal outcomes, those very choices must have been determined by cultural 
bias. In consequence, everyone is a brainwashed victim, wherever gender differences 
exist, and the rigorous critical theoretician is morally obligated to set them straight. This 
means that those already equity-minded Scandinavian males, who aren't much into 
nursing, require even more retraining. The same goes, in principle, for Scandinavian 
females, who aren't much into engineering. What might such retraining look like? 
Where might its limits lie? Such things are often pushed past any reasonable limit before 
they are discontinued. Mao's murderous Cultural Revolution should have taught us that. 

Boys into Girls 

It has become a tenet of a certain kind of social constructionist theory that the world 
would be much improved if boys were socialized like girls. Those who put forward such 
theories assume, first, that aggression is a learned behaviour, and can therefore simply 
not be taught, and second (to take a particular example) that, "boys should be socialized 
the way girls have been traditionally socialized, and they should be encouraged to develop 
socially positive qualities such as tenderness, sensitivity to feelings, nurturance, 
cooperative and aesthetic appreciation." In the opinions of such thinkers, aggression will 
only be reduced when male adolescents and young adults "subscribe to the same 
standards of behavior as have been traditionally encouraged for women."! 

There are so many things wrong with this idea that it is difficult to know where to 
start. First, it is not the case that aggression is merely learned. Aggression is there at the 
beginning. There are ancient biological circuits, so to speak, that underlie defensive and 
predatory aggression. They are so fundamental that they still operate in what are 


213 


known as decorticate cats, animals that have had the largest and most recently evolved 
parts of their brain-an overwhelmingly large percentage of the total structure-entirely 
removed. This suggests not only that aggression is innate, but that it is a consequence of 
activity in extremely fundamental, basic brain areas. If the brain is a tree, then aggression 
(along with hunger, thirst and sexual desire) is there in the very trunk. 

And, in keeping with this, it appears that a subset of two-year-old boys (about 5 
percent) are quite aggressive, by temperament. They take other kids' toys, kick, bite and 
hit. Most are nonetheless socialized effectively by the age of four. This is not, however, 
because they have been encouraged to act like little girls. Instead, they are taught or 
otherwise learn in early childhood to integrate their aggressive tendencies into more 
sophisticated behavioural routines. Aggression underlies the drive to be outstanding, to 
be unstoppable, to compete, to win-to be actively virtuous, at least along one dimension. 
Determination is its admirable, pro-social face. Aggressive young children who don't 
manage to render their temperament sophisticated by the end of infancy are doomed to 
unpopularity, as their primordial antagonism no longer serves them socially at later ages. 
Rejected by their peers, they lack further socialization opportunities and tend towards 
outcast status. These are the individuals who remain much more inclined toward 
antisocial and criminal behavior when adolescent and adult. But this does not at all mean 
that the aggressive drive lacks either utility or value. At a minimum, it is necessary for 
self-protection. 

Compassion as a Vice 

Many of the female clients (perhaps even a majority) that I see in my clinical practice have 
trouble in their jobs and family lives not because they are too aggressive, but because they 
are not aggressive enough. Cognitive-behavioural therapists call the treatment of such 
people, generally characterized by the more feminine traits of agreeableness (politeness 
and compassion) and neuroticism (anxiety and emotional pain), "assertiveness 
training."- Insufficiently aggressive women-and men, although more rarely-do too 
much for others. They tend to treat those around them as if they were distressed children. 
They tend to be naive. They assume that cooperation should be the basis of all social 
transactions, and they avoid conflict (which means they avoid confronting problems in 
their relationships as well as at work). They continually sacrifice for others. This may 
sound virtuous-and it is definitely an attitude that has certain social advantages-but it 
can and often does become counterproductively one-sided. Because too-agreeable people 
bend over backwards for other people, they do not stand up properly for themselves. 
Assuming that others think as they do, they expect-instead of ensuring-reciprocity for 
their thoughtful actions. When this does not happen, they don't speak up. They do not or 
cannot straightforwardly demand recognition. The dark side of their characters emerges, 
because of their subjugation, and they become resentful. 

I teach excessively agreeable people to note the emergence of such resentment, which is 
a very important, although very toxic, emotion. There are only two major reasons for 
resentment: being taken advantage of (or allowing yourself to be taken advantage of), or 
whiny refusal to adopt responsibility and grow up. If you're resentful, look for the 
reasons. Perhaps discuss the issue with someone you trust. Are you feeling hard done by, 
in an immature manner? If, after some honest consideration, you don't think it's that, 
perhaps someone is taking advantage of you. This means that you now face a moral 
obligation to speak up for yourself. This might mean confronting your boss, or your 
husband, or your wife, or your child, or your parents. It might mean gathering some 
evidence, strategically, so that when you confront that person, you can give them several 
examples of their misbehaviour (at least three), so they can't easily weasel out of your 


214 


accusations. It might mean failing to concede when they offer you their 
counterarguments. People rarely have more than four at hand. If you remain unmoved, 
they get angry, or cry, or run away. It's very useful to attend to tears in such situations. 
They can be used to motivate guilt on the part of the accuser due, theoretically, to having 
caused hurt feelings and pain. But tears are often shed in anger. A red face is a good cue. 
If you can push your point past the first four responses and stand fast against the 
consequent emotion, you will gain your target's attention-and, perhaps, their respect. 
This is genuine conflict, however, and it's neither pleasant nor easy. 

You must also know clearly what you want out of the situation, and be prepared to 
clearly articulate your desire. It's a good idea to tell the person you are confronting exactly 
what you would like them to do instead of what they have done or currently are doing. 
You might think, "if they loved me, they would know what to do." That's the voice of 
resentment. Assume ignorance before malevolence. No one has a direct pipeline to your 
wants and needs-not even you. If you try to determine exactly what you want, you might 
find that it is more difficult than you think. The person oppressing you is likely no wiser 
than you, especially about you. Tell them directly what would be preferable, instead, after 
you have sorted it out. Make your request as small and reasonable as possible-but 
ensure that its fulfillment would satisfy you. In that manner, you come to the discussion 
with a solution, instead of just a problem. 

Agreeable, compassionate, empathic, conflict-averse people (all those traits group 
together) let people walk on them, and they get bitter. They sacrifice themselves for 
others, sometimes excessively, and cannot comprehend why that is not reciprocated. 
Agreeable people are compliant, and this robs them of their independence. The danger 
associated with this can be amplified by high trait neuroticism. Agreeable people will go 
along with whoever makes a suggestion, instead of insisting, at least sometimes, on their 
own way. So, they lose their way, and become indecisive and too easily swayed. If they 
are, in addition, easily frightened and hurt, they have even less reason to strike out on 
their own, as doing so exposes them to threat and danger (at least in the short term). 
That's the pathway to dependent personality disorder, technically speaking. - It might be 
regarded as the polar opposite of antisocial personality disorder, the set of traits 
characteristic of delinquency in childhood and adolescence and criminality in adulthood. 
It would be lovely if the opposite of a criminal was a saint-but it's not the case. The 
opposite of a criminal is an Oedipal mother, which is its own type of criminal. 

The Oedipal mother (and fathers can play this role too, but it's comparatively rare) says 
to her child, "I only live for you." She does everything for her children. She ties their 
shoes, and cuts up their food, and lets them crawl into bed with her and her partner far 
too often. That's a good and conflict-avoidant method for avoiding unwanted sexual 
attention, as well. 

The Oedipal mother makes a pact with herself, her children, and the devil himself. The 
deal is this: "Above all, never leave me. In return, I will do everything for you. As you age 
without maturing, you will become worthless and bitter, but you will never have to take 
any responsibility, and everything you do that's wrong will always be someone else's 
fault." The children can accept or reject this-and they have some choice in the matter. 

The Oedipal mother is the witch in the story of Hansel and Gretel. The two children in 
that fairy tale have a new step-mother. She orders her husband to abandon his children in 
the forest, as there is a famine and she thinks they eat too much. He obeys his wife, takes 
his children deep into the woods and leaves them to their fate. Wandering, starving and 
lonely, they come across a miracle. A house. And not just any house. A candy house. A 
gingerbread house. A person who had not been rendered too caring, empathic, 
sympathetic and cooperative might be skeptical, and ask, "Is this too good to be true?" 
But the children are too young, and too desperate. 


215 


Inside the house is a kind old woman, rescuer of distraught children, kind patter of 
heads and wiper of noses, all bosom and hips, ready to sacrifice herself to their every 
wish, at a moment's notice. She feeds the children anything they want, any time they 
want, and they never have to do anything. But provision of that kind of care makes her 
hungry. She puts Hansel into a cage, to fatten him up ever more efficiently. He fools her 
into thinking he's staying thin by offering her an old bone, when she tries to test his leg 
for the desired tenderness. She gets too desperate to wait, eventually, and stokes the 
oven, preparing to cook and eat the object of her doting. Gretel, who has apparently not 
been lulled into full submission, waits for a moment of carelessness, and pushes the kind 
old woman into the oven. The kids run away, and rejoin their father, who has thoroughly 
repented of his evil actions. 

In a household like that, the choicest cut of child is the spirit, and it's always consumed 
first. Too much protection devastates the developing soul. 

The witch in the Hansel and Gretel tale is the Terrible Mother, the dark half of the 
symbolically feminine. Deeply social as we are in our essence, we tend to view the world 
as a story, the characters of which are mother, father and child. The feminine, as a whole, 
is unknown nature outside the bounds of culture, creation and destruction: she is the 
protective arms of mother and the destructive element of time, the beautiful virgin- 
mother and the swamp-dwelling hag. This archetypal entity was confused with an 
objective, historical reality, back in the late 1800s, by a Swiss anthropologist named 
Johann Jakob Bachofen. Bachofen proposed that humanity had passed through a series of 
developmental stages in its history. 

The first, roughly speaking (after a somewhat anarchic and chaotic beginning), was Das 
Mutterrecht -a society where women held the dominant positions of power, respect 
and honour, where polyamory and promiscuity ruled, and where any certainty of paternity 
was absent. The second, the Dionysian, was a phase of transition, during which these 
original matriarchal foundations were overturned and power was taken by men. The third 
phase, the Apollonian, still reigns today. The patriarchy rules, and each woman belongs 
exclusively to one man. Bachofen's ideas became profoundly influential, in certain circles, 
despite the absence of any historical evidence to support them. One Marija Gimbutas, for 
example-an archaeologist-famously claimed in the 1980s and 1990s that a peaceful 
goddess-and-woman-centred culture once characterized Neolithic Europe. She claimed 
that it was supplanted and suppressed by an invasive hierarchical warrior culture, which 
laid the basis for modern society. Art historian Merlin Stone made the same argument in 
his book When God Was a Woman. This whole series of essentially 
archetypal/mythological ideas became touchstones for the theology of the women's 
movement and the matriarchal studies of 1970s feminism (Cynthia Eller, who wrote a 
book criticizing such ideas- The Myth of Matriarchal Prehistory -called this theology "an 
ennobling lie"). 

Carl Jung had encountered Bachofen's ideas of primordial matriarchy decades earlier. 
Jung soon realized, however, that the developmental progression described by the earlier 
Swiss thinker represented a psychological rather than a historical reality. He saw in 
Bachofen's thought the same processes of projection of imaginative fantasy on to the 
external world that had led to the population of the cosmos with constellations and gods. 
In The Origins and History of Consciousness and The Great Mother -, Jung's collaborator 
Erich Neumann extended his colleague's analysis. Neumann traced the emergence of 
consciousness, symbolically masculine, and contrasted it with its symbolically feminine, 
material (mother, matrix) origins, subsuming Freud's theory of Oedipal parenting into a 
broader archetypal model. For Neumann, and for Jung, consciousness-always 
symbolically masculine, even in women-struggles upwards toward the light. Its 
development is painful and anxiety-provoking, as it carries with it the realization of 


216 


vulnerability and death. It is constantly tempted to sink back down into dependency and 
unconsciousness, and to shed its existential burden. It is aided in that pathological desire 
by anything that opposes enlightenment, articulation, rationality, self-determination, 
strength and competence-by anything that shelters too much, and therefore smothers 
and devours. Such overprotection is Freud's Oedipal familial nightmare, which we are 
rapidly transforming into social policy. 

The Terrible Mother is an ancient symbol. It manifests itself, for example, in the form 
of Tiamat, in the earliest written story we have recovered, the Mesopotamian Enuma Elish. 
Tiamat is the mother of all things, gods and men alike. She is the unknown and chaos and 
the nature that gives rise to all forms. But she is also the female dragon-deity who moves 
to destroy her own children, when they carelessly kill their father and attempt to live on 
the corpse that remains. The Terrible Mother is the spirit of careless unconsciousness, 
tempting the ever-striving spirit of awareness and enlightenment down into the protective 
womb-like embrace of the underworld. It's the terror young men feel towards attractive 
women, who are nature itself, ever ready to reject them, intimately, at the deepest 
possible level. Nothing inspires self-consciousness, undermines courage, and fosters 
feelings of nihilism and hatred more than that-except, perhaps, the too-tight embrace of 
too-caring mom. 

The Terrible Mother appears in many fairy tales, and in many stories for adults. In the 
Sleeping Beauty, she is the Evil Queen, dark nature herself-Maleficent, in the Disney 
version. The royal parents of Princess Aurora fail to invite this force of the night to their 
baby daughter's christening. Thus, they shelter her too much from the destructive and 
dangerous side of reality, preferring that she grow up untroubled by such things. Their 
reward? At puberty, she is still unconscious. The masculine spirit, her prince, is both a 
man who could save her, by tearing her from her parents, and her own consciousness, 
trapped in a dungeon by the machinations of the dark side of femininity. When that 
prince escapes, and presses the Evil Queen too hard, she turns into the Dragon of Chaos 
itself. The symbolic masculine defeats her with truth and faith, and finds the princess, 
whose eyes he opens with a kiss. 

It might be objected (as it was, with Disney's more recent and deeply propagandistic 
Frozen ) that a woman does not need a man to rescue her. That may be true, and it may 
not. It may be that only the woman who wants (or has) a child needs a man to rescue her 
-or at least to support and aid her. In any case, it is certain that a woman needs 
consciousness be rescued, and, as noted above, consciousness is symbolically masculine 
and has been since the beginning of time (in the guise both of order and of the Logos, the 
mediating principle). The Prince could be a lover, but could also be a woman's own 
attentive wakefulness, clarity of vision, and tough-minded independence. Those are 
masculine traits-in actuality, as well as symbolically, as men are actually less tender- 
minded and agreeable than women, on average, and are less susceptible to anxiety and 
emotional pain. And, to say it again: (1) this is most true in those Scandinavian nations 
where the most steps towards gender equality have been taken-and (2) the differences 
are not small by the standards whereby such things are measured. 

The relationship between the masculine and consciousness is also portrayed, 
symbolically, in the Disney movie The Little Mermaid. Ariel, the heroine, is quite feminine, 
but she also has a strong spirit of independence. For this reason, she is her father's 
favourite, although she also causes him the most trouble. Her father Triton is the king, 
representing the known, culture and order (with a hint of the oppressive rule-giver and 
tyrant). Because order is always opposed by chaos, Triton has an adversary, Ursula, a 
tentacled octopus-a serpent, a gorgon, a hydra. Thus, Ursula is in the same archetypal 
category as the dragon/queen Maleficent in Sleeping Beauty (or the jealous older queen in 


217 



Snow White, Lady Tremaine in Cinderella, the Red Queen in Alice in Wonderland, Cruella de 
Vil in 101 Dalmations, Miss Medusa in The Rescuers and Mother Gothel in Tangled ). 

Ariel wants to kindle a romance with Prince Eric, whom she previously rescued from a 
shipwreck. Ursula tricks Ariel into giving up her voice so that she can have three days as a 
human being. Ursula knows full well, however, that a voiceless Ariel will not be able to 
establish a relationship with the Prince. Without her capacity to speak-without the 
Logos; without the Divine Word-she will remain underwater, unconscious, forever. 

When Ariel fails to form a union with Prince Eric, Ursula steals her soul, and places it 
in her large collection of shrivelled and warped semi-beings, well-protected by her 
feminine graces. When King Triton shows up to demand the return of his daughter, 
Ursula makes him a terrible offer: he can take Ariel's place. Of course, the elimination of 
the Wise King (who represents, to say it again, the benevolent side of the patriarchy) has 
been Ursula's nefarious plan all along. Ariel is released, but Triton is now reduced to a 
pathetic shadow of his former self. More importantly, Ursula now has Triton's magic 
trident, the source of his godlike power. 

Fortunately for everyone concerned (except Ursula), Prince Eric returns, distracting the 
evil queen of the underworld with a harpoon. This opens an opportunity for Ariel to 
attack Ursula, who grows, in response, to monstrous proportions-in the same manner as 
Maleficent, Sleeping Beauty's evil queen. Ursula creates a huge storm, and raises a whole 
navy of sunken ships from the ocean floor. As she prepares to kill Ariel, Eric 
commandeers a wrecked ship, and rams her with its broken bowsprit. Triton and the 
other captured souls are released. The rejuvenated Triton then transforms his daughter 
into a human being, so she can remain with Eric. For a woman to become complete, such 
stories claim, she must form a relationship with masculine consciousness and stand up to 
the terrible world (which sometimes manifests itself, primarily, in the form of her too- 
present mother). An actual man can help her do that, to some degree, but it is better for 
everyone concerned when no one is too dependent. 

One day, when I was a kid, I was out playing softball with some friends. The teams 
were a mixture of boys and girls. We were all old enough so that the boys and girls were 
starting to be interested in one another in an unfamiliar way. Status was becoming more 
relevant and important. My friend Jake and I were about to come to blows, pushing each 
other around near the pitching mound, when my mom walked by. She was a fair distance 
away, about thirty yards, but I could immediately see by the change in her body language 
that she knew what was going on. Of course, the other kids saw her as well. She walked 
right by. I knew that hurt her. Part of her was worried that I would come home with a 
bloody nose and a black eye. It would have been easy enough for her just to yell, "Hey, 
you kids, quit that!" or even to come over and interfere. But she didn't. A few years later, 
when I was having teenage trouble with my dad, my mom said, "If it was too good at 
home, you'd never leave." 

My mom is a tender-hearted person. She's empathetic, and cooperative, and agreeable. 
Sometimes she lets people push her around. When she went back to work after being at 
home with her young kids, she found it challenging to stand up to the men. Sometimes 
that made her resentful-something she also feels, sometimes, in relationship to my 
father, who is strongly inclined to do what he wants, when he wants to. Despite all that, 
she's no Oedipal mother. She fostered the independence of her children, even though 
doing so was often hard on her. She did the right thing, even though it caused her 
emotional distress. 

Toughen Up, You Weasel 


218 



I spent one youthful summer on the prairie of central Saskatchewan working on a railway 
line crew. Every man in that all-male group was tested by the others during the first two 
weeks or so of their hiring. Many of the other workers were Northern Cree Indians, quiet 
guys for the most part, easygoing, until they drank too much, and the chips on their 
shoulders started to show. They had been in and out of jail, as had most of their relatives. 
They didn't attach much shame to that, considering it just another part of the white 
man's system. It was also warm in jail in the winter, and the food was regular and 
plentiful. I lent one of the Cree guys fifty bucks at one point. Instead of paying me back, 
he offered me a pair of bookends, cut from some of the original rail laid across western 
Canada, which I still own. That was better than the fifty bucks. 

When a new guy first showed up, the other workers would inevitably provide him with 
an insulting nickname. They called me Howdy-Doody, after I was accepted as a crew 
member (something I am still slightly embarrassed to admit). When I asked the 
originator why he chose that moniker, he said, wittily and absurdly, "Because you look 
nothing like him." Working men are often extremely funny, in a caustic, biting, insulting 
manner (as discussed in Rule 9). They are always harassing each other, partly for 
amusement, partly to score points in the eternal dominance battle between them, but also 
partly to see what the other guy will do if he is subjected to social stress. It's part of the 
process of character evaluation, as well as camaraderie. When it works well (when 
everybody gets, and gives as good as they get, and can give and take) it's a big part of 
what allows men who work for a living to tolerate or even enjoy laying pipe and working 
on oil rigs and lumberjacking and working in restaurant kitchens and all the other hot, 
dirty, physically demanding and dangerous work that is still done almost totally by men. 

Not too long after I started on the rail crew, my name was changed to Howdy. This was 
a great improvement, as it had a good Western connotation, and was not obviously linked 
to that stupid puppet. The next man hired was not so fortunate. He carried a fancy 
lunchbucket, which was a mistake, as brown paper bags were the proper, non-pretentious 
convention. It was a little too nice and too new. It looked like maybe his mother had 
bought it (and packed it) for him. Thus, it became his name. Lunchbucket was not a 
good-humored guy. He bitched about everything, and had a bad attitude. Everything was 
someone else's fault. He was touchy, and none too quick on the draw. 

Lunchbucket couldn't accept his name, or settle into his job. He adopted an attitude of 
condescending irritation when addressed, and reacted to the work in the same manner. 
He was not fun to be around, and he couldn't take a joke. That's fatal, on a work crew. 
After about three days of carrying on with his ill-humour and general air of hard-done-by 
superiority, Lunchbucket started to experience harassment extending well beyond his 
nickname. He would be peevishly working away on the line, surrounded by about seventy 
men, spread out over a quarter mile. Suddenly a pebble would appear out of nowhere, 
flying through the air, aimed at his hardhat. A direct hit would produce a thunking sound, 
deeply satisfying to all the quietly attending onlookers. Even this failed to improve his 
humour. So, the pebbles got larger. Lunchbucket would involve himself in something and 
forget to pay attention. Then, "thunk!"-a well-aimed stone would nail him on the 
noggin, producing a burst of irritated and ineffectual fury. Quiet amusement would ripple 
down the rail line. After a few days of this, no wiser, and carrying a few bruises, 
Lunchbucket vanished. 

Men enforce a code of behaviour on each other, when working together. Do your work. 
Pull your weight. Stay awake and pay attention. Don't whine or be touchy. Stand up for 
your friends. Don't suck up and don't snitch. Don't be a slave to stupid rules. Don't, in 
the immortal words of Arnold Schwarzenegger, be a girlie man. Don't be dependent. At 
all. Ever. Period. The harassment that is part of acceptance on a working crew is a test: 
are you tough, entertaining, competent and reliable? If not, go away. Simple as that. We 


219 



don't need to feel sorry for you. We don't want to put up with your narcissism, and we 
don't want to do your work. 

There was a famous advertisement in the form of a comic strip issued a few decades ago 
by the bodybuilder Charles Atlas. It was titled "The Insult that Made a Man out of Mac" 
and could be found in almost every comic book, most of which were read by boys. Mac, 
the protagonist, is sitting on a beach blanket with an attractive young woman. A bully 
runs by, and kicks sand in both their faces. Mac objects. The much larger man grabs him 
by the arm and says, "Listen here. I'd smash your face .... Only you're so skinny you 
might dry up and blow away." The bully departs. Mac says to the girl, "The big bully! I'll 
get even some day." She adopts a provocative pose, and says, "Oh, don't let it bother you, 
little boy." Mac goes home, considers his pathetic physique, and buys the Atlas program. 
Soon, he has a new body. The next time he goes to the beach, he punches the bully in the 
nose. The now-admiring girl clings to his arm. "Oh, Mac!" she says. "You're a real man 
after all." 

That ad is famous for a reason. It summarizes human sexual psychology in seven 
straightforward panels. The too-weak young man is embarrassed and self-conscious, as he 
should be. What good is he? He gets put down by other men and, worse, by desirable 
women. Instead of drowning in resentment, and skulking off to his basement to play 
video games in his underwear, covered with Cheetos dust, he presents himself with what 
Alfred Adler, Freud's most practical colleague, called a "compensatory fantasy." The 
goal of such a fantasy is not so much wish-fulfillment, as illumination of a genuine path 
forward. Mac takes serious note of his scarecrow-like build and decides that he should 
develop a stronger body. More importantly, he puts his plan into action. He identifies 
with the part of himself that could transcend his current state, and becomes the hero of 
his own adventure. He goes back to the beach, and punches the bully in the nose. Mac 
wins. So does his eventual girlfriend. So does everybody else. 

It is to women's clear advantage that men do not happily put up with dependency 
among themselves. Part of the reason that so many a working-class woman does not 
marry, now, as we have alluded to, is because she does not want to look after a man, 
struggling for employment, as well as her children. And fair enough. A woman should 
look after her children-although that is not all she should do. And a man should look 
after a woman and children-although that is not all he should do. But a woman should 
not look after a man, because she must look after children, and a man should not be a 
child. This means that he must not be dependent. This is one of the reasons that men 
have little patience for dependent men. And let us not forget: wicked women may produce 
dependent sons, may support and even marry dependent men, but awake and conscious 
women want an awake and conscious partner. 

If is for this reason that Nelson Muntz of The Simpsons is so necessary to the small social 
group that surrounds Homer's antihero son, Bart. Without Nelson, King of the Bullies, 
the school would soon be overrun by resentful, touchy Milhouses, narcissistic, intellectual 
Martin Princes, soft, chocolate-gorging German children, and infantile Ralph Wiggums. 
Muntz is a corrective, a tough, self-sufficient kid who uses his own capacity for contempt 
to decide what line of immature and pathetic behaviour simply cannot be crossed. Part of 
the genius of The Simpsons is its writers' refusal to simply write Nelson off as an 
irredeemable bully. Abandoned by his worthless father, neglected, thankfully, by his 
thoughtless slut of a mother, Nelson does pretty well, everything considered. He's even of 
romantic interest to the thoroughly progressive Lisa, much to her dismay and confusion 
(for much the same reasons that Fifty Shades of Grey became a worldwide phenomenon). 

When softness and harmlessness become the only consciously acceptable virtues, then 
hardness and dominance will start to exert an unconscious fascination. Partly what this 
means for the future is that if men are pushed too hard to feminize, they will become 


220 


more and more interested in harsh, fascist political ideology. Fight Club, perhaps the most 
fascist popular film made in recent years by Hollywood, with the possible exception of the 
Iron Man series, provides a perfect example of such inevitable attraction. The populist 
groundswell of support for Donald Trump in the US is part of the same process, as is (in 
far more sinister form) the recent rise of far-right political parties even in such moderate 
and liberal places as Holland, Sweden and Norway. 

Men have to toughen up. Men demand it, and women want it, even though they may 
not approve of the harsh and contemptuous attitude that is part and parcel of the socially 
demanding process that fosters and then enforces that toughness. Some women don't like 
losing their baby boys, so they keep them forever. Some women don't like men, and 
would rather have a submissive mate, even if he is useless. This also provides them with 
plenty to feel sorry for themselves about, as well. The pleasures of such self-pity should 
not be underestimated. 

Men toughen up by pushing themselves, and by pushing each other. When I was a 
teenager, the boys were much more likely to get into car accidents than the girls (as they 
still are). This was because they were out spinning donuts at night in icy parking lots. 
They were drag racing and driving their cars over the roadless hills extending from the 
nearby river up to the level land hundreds of feet higher. They were more likely to fight 
physically, and to skip class, and to tell the teachers off, and to quit school because they 
were tired of raising their hands for permission to go to the bathroom when they were big 
and strong enough to work on the oil rigs. They were more likely to race their motorbikes 
on frozen lakes in the winter. Like the skateboarders, and crane climbers, and free 
runners, they were doing dangerous things, trying to make themselves useful. When this 
process goes too far, boys (and men) drift into the antisocial behavior which is far more 
prevalent in males than in females. That does not mean that every manifestation of 
daring and courage is criminal. 

When the boys were spinning donuts, they were also testing the limits of their cars, 
their ability as drivers, and their capacity for control, in an out-of-control situation. When 
they told off the teachers, they were pushing against authority, to see if there was any real 
authority there-the kind that could be relied on, in principle, in a crisis. When they quit 
school, they went to work as rig roughnecks when it was forty bloody degrees below zero. 
It wasn't weakness that propelled so many out of the classroom, where a better future 
arguably awaited. It was strength. 

If they're healthy, women don't want boys. They want men. They want someone to 
contend with; someone to grapple with. If they're tough, they want someone tougher. If 
they're smart, they want someone smarter. They desire someone who brings to the table 
something they can't already provide. This often makes it hard for tough, smart, attractive 
women to find mates: there just aren't that many men around who can outclass them 
enough to be considered desirable (who are higher, as one research publication put it, in 
"income, education, self-confidence, intelligence, dominance and social position"). The 
spirit that interferes when boys are trying to become men is, therefore, no more friend to 
woman than it is to man. It will object, just as vociferously and self-righteously ("you 
can't do it, it's too dangerous") when little girls try to stand on their own two feet. It 
negates consciousness. It's antihuman, desirous of failure, jealous, resentful and 
destructive. No one truly on the side of humanity would ally him or herself with such a 
thing. No one aiming at moving up would allow him or herself to become possessed by 
such a thing. And if you think tough men are dangerous, wait until you see what weak 
men are capable of. 

Leave children alone when they are skateboarding. 


221 


/** 

VS 


222 





223 





a 


224 


RULE 12 

PET A CAT WHEN YOU ENCOUNTER ONE ON THE STREET 


DOGS ARE OK TOO 

I am going to start this chapter by stating directly that I own a dog, an American Eskimo, 
one of the many variants of the basic spitz type. They were known as German spitzes 
until the First World War made it verboten to admit that anything good could come from 
Germany. American Eskimos are among the most beautiful of dogs, with a pointed, 
classic wolf face, upright ears, a long thick coat, and a curly tail. They are also very 
intelligent. Our dog, whose name is Sikko (which means "ice" in an Inuit language, 
according to my daughter, who named him), learns tricks very rapidly, and can do so even 
now that he's old. I taught him a new stunt, recently, when he turned thirteen. He already 
knew how to shake a paw, and to balance a treat on his nose. I taught him to do both at 
the same time. However, it's not at all clear he enjoys it. 

We bought Sikko for my daughter, Mikhaila, when she was about ten years old. He was 
an unbearably cute pup. Small nose and ears, rounded face, big eyes, awkward movements 
-these features automatically elicit caretaking behaviour from humans, male and female 
alike. This was certainly the case with Mikhaila, who was also occupied with the care of 
bearded dragons, gekkoes, ball pythons, chameleons, iguanas and a twenty-pound, thirty- 
two-inch-long Flemish Giant rabbit named George, who nibbled on everything in the 
house and frequently escaped (to the great consternation of those who then spied his 
improbably large form in their tiny mid-city gardens). She had all these animals because 
she was allergic to the more typical pets-excepting Sikko, who had the additional 
advantage of being hypo-allergenic. 

Sikko garnered fifty nicknames (we counted) which varied broadly in their emotional 
tone, and reflected both the affection in which he was held and our occasional frustration 
with his beastly habits. Scumdog was probably my favorite, but I also held Rathound, 
Furball and Suck-dog in rather high esteem. The kids used Sneak and Squeak (sometimes 
with an appended o) most frequently, but accompanied it with Snooky, Ugdog, and 
Snorfalopogus (horrible though it is to admit). Snorbs is Mikhaila's current moniker of 
choice. She uses it to greet him after a prolonged absence. For full effect, it must be 
uttered in a high-pitched and surprised voice. 

Sikko also happens to have his own Instagram hashtag: #JudgementalSikko. 

I am describing my dog instead of writing directly about cats because I don't wish to 
run afoul of a phenomenon known as "minimal group identification," discovered by the 
social psychologist Henri Tajfel. Tajfel brought his research subjects into his lab and 
sat them down in front of a screen, onto which he flashed a number of dots. The subjects 
were asked to estimate their quantity. Then he categorized his subjects as overestimators 
vs underestimators, as well as accurate vs inaccurate, and put them into groups 
corresponding to their performance. Then he asked them to divide money among the 
members of all the groups. 

Tajfel found that his subjects displayed a marked preference for their own group 
members, rejecting an egalitarian distribution strategy and disproportionately rewarding 
those with whom they now identified. Other researchers have assigned people to different 
groups using ever more arbitrary strategies, such as flipping a coin. It didn't matter, even 
when the subjects were informed of the way the groups were composed. People still 
favoured the co-members of their personal group. 


225 


Tajfel's studies demonstrated two things: first, that people are social; second, that people 
are antisocial. People are social because they like the members of their own group. People 
are antisocial because they don't like the members of other groups. Exactly why this is so 
has been the subject of continual debate. I think it might be a solution to a complex 
problem of optimization. Such problems arise, for example, when two or more factors are 
important, but none cannot be maximized without diminishing the others. A problem of 
this sort emerges, for example, because of the antipathy between cooperation and 
competition, both of which are socially and psychologically desirable. Cooperation is for 
safety, security and companionship. Competition is for personal growth and status. 
However, if a given group is too small, it has no power or prestige, and cannot fend off 
other groups. In consequence, being one of its members is not that useful. If the group is 
too large, however, the probability of climbing near or to the top declines. So, it becomes 
too hard to get ahead. Perhaps people identify with groups at the flip of a coin because 
they deeply want to organize themselves, protect themselves, and still have some 
reasonable probability of climbing the dominance hierarchy. Then they favour their own 
group, because favouring it helps it thrive-and climbing something that is failing is not a 
useful strategy. 

In any case, it is because of Tajfel's minimal-conditions discovery that I began this cat- 
related chapter with a description of my dog. Otherwise, the mere mention of a cat in the 
title would be enough to turn many dog people against me, just because I didn't include 
canines in the group of entities that should be petted. Since I also like dogs, there is no 
reason for me to suffer such a fate. So, if you like to pet dogs when you meet them on the 
street, don't feel obliged to hate me. Rest assured, instead, that this is also an activity of 
which I approve. I would also like to apologize to all the cat people who now feel slighted, 
because they were hoping for a cat story but had to read all this dog-related material. 
Perhaps they might be satisfied by some assurance that cats do illustrate the point I want 
to make better, and that I will eventually discuss them. First, however, to other things. 

Suffering and the Limitations of Being 

The idea that life is suffering is a tenet, in one form or another, of every major religious 
doctrine, as we have already discussed. Buddhists state it directly. Christians illustrate it 
with the cross. Jews commemorate the suffering endured over centuries. Such reasoning 
universally characterizes the great creeds, because human beings are intrinsically fragile. 
We can be damaged, even broken, emotionally and physically, and we are all subject to 
the depredations of aging and loss. This is a dismal set of facts, and it is reasonable to 
wonder how we can expect to thrive and be happy (or even to want to exist, sometimes) 
under such conditions. 

I was speaking recently with a client whose husband had been engaging in a successful 
battle with cancer for an agonizing period of five years. They had both held up remarkably 
and courageously over this period. However, he fell prey to the tendency of that dread 
condition to metastasize and, in consequence, had been given very little time to live. It is 
perhaps hardest to hear terrible news like this when you are still in the fragile post- 
recovery state that occurs after dealing successfully with previous bad news. Tragedy at 
such a time seems particularly unfair. It is the sort of thing that can make you distrust 
even hope itself. It's frequently sufficient to cause genuine trauma. My client and I 
discussed a number of issues, some philosophical and abstract, some more concrete. I 
shared with her some of the thoughts that I had developed about the whys and 
wherefores of human vulnerability. 

When my son, Julian, was about three, he was particularly cute. He's twenty years older 
than that now, but still quite cute (a compliment I'm sure he'll particularly enjoy 


226 



reading). Because of him, I thought a lot about the fragility of small children. A three- 
year-old is easily damaged. Dogs can bite him. Cars can hit him. Mean kids can push him 
over. He can get sick (and sometimes did). Julian was prone to high fevers and the 
delirium they sometimes produce. Sometimes I had to take him into the shower with me 
and cool him off when he was hallucinating, or even fighting with me, in his feverish 
state. There are few things that make it harder to accept the fundamental limitations of 
human existence than a sick child. 

Mikhaila, a year and a few months older than Julian, also had her problems. When she 
was two, I would lift her up on my shoulders and carry her around. Kids enjoy that. 
Afterwards, however, when I put her feet back on the ground, she would sit down and 
cry. So, I stopped doing it. That seemed to be the end of the problem-with a seemingly 
minor exception. My wife, Tammy, told me that something was wrong with Mikhaila's 
gait. I couldn't see it. Tammy thought it might be related to her reaction to being carried 
on my shoulders. 

Mikhaila was a sunny child and very easy to get along with. One day when she was 
about fourteen months old I took her along with Tammy and her grandparents to Cape 
Cod, when we lived in Boston. When we got there, Tammy and her mom and dad walked 
ahead, and left me with Mikhaila in the car. We were in the front seat. She was lying there 
in the sun, babbling away. I leaned over to hear what she was saying. 

"Happy, happy, happy, happy, happy." 

That's what she was like. 

When she turned six, however, she started to get mopey. It was hard to get her out of 
bed in the morning. She put on her clothes very slowly. When we walked somewhere, she 
lagged behind. She complained that her feet hurt and that her shoes didn't fit. We bought 
her ten different pairs, but it didn't help. She went to school, and held her head up, and 
behaved properly. But when she came home, and saw her Mom, she would break into 
tears. 

We had recently moved from Boston to Toronto, and attributed these changes to the 
stress of the move. But it didn't get better. Mikhaila began to walk up and down stairs 
one step at a time. She began to move like someone much older. She complained if you 
held her hand. (One time, much later, she asked me, "Dad, when you played 'this little 
piggy,' with me when I was little, was it supposed to hurt?" Things you learn too late ...). 

A physician at our local medical clinic told us, "Sometimes children have growing 
pains. They're normal. But you could think about taking her to see a physiotherapist." So, 
we did. The physiotherapist tried to rotate Mikhaila's heel. It didn't move. That was not 
good. The physio told us, "Your daughter has juvenile rheumatoid arthritis." This was not 
what we wanted to hear. We did not like that physiotherapist. We went back to the 
medical clinic. Another physician there told us to take Mikhaila to the Hospital for Sick 
Children. The doctor said, "Take her to the emergency room. That way, you will be able 
to see a rheumatologist quickly." Mikhaila had arthritis, all right. The physio, bearer of 
unwelcome news, was correct. Thirty-seven affected joints. Severe polyarticular juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis (JIA). Cause? Unknown. Prognosis? Multiple early joint replacements. 

What sort of God would make a world where such a thing could happen, at all?-much 
less to an innocent and happy little girl? It's a question of absolutely fundamental import, 
for believer and non-believer alike. It's an issue addressed (as are so many difficult 
matters) in The Brothers Karamazov, the great novel by Dostoevsky we began to discuss in 
Rule 7. Dostoevsky expresses his doubts about the propriety of Being through the 
character of Ivan who, if you remember, is the articulate, handsome, sophisticated brother 
(and greatest adversary) of the monastic novitiate Alyosha. "It's not God I don't accept. 
Understand this," says Ivan. "I do not accept the world that He created, this world of 
God's, and cannot agree with it." 


227 



Ivan tells Alyosha a story about a small girl whose parents punished her by locking her 
in a freezing outhouse overnight (a story Dostoevsky culled from a newspaper of the 
time). "Can you just see those two snoozing away while their daughter was crying all 
night?" says Ivan. "And imagine this little child: unable to understand what was 
happening to her, beating her frozen little chest and crying meek little tears, begging 
'gentle Jesus' to get her out of that horrible place! ... Alyosha: if you were somehow 
promised that the world could finally have complete and total peace-but only on the 
condition that you tortured one little child to death-say, that girl who was freezing in 
the outhouse ... would you do it?" Alyosha demurs. "No, I would not," he says, softly.- 
He would not do what God seems to freely allow. 

I had realized something relevant to this, years before, about three-year-old Julian 
(remember him? :)). I thought, "I love my son. He's three, and cute and little and 
comical. But I am also afraid for him, because he could be hurt. If I had the power to 
change that, what might I do?" I thought, "He could be twenty feet tall instead of forty 
inches. Nobody could push him over then. He could be made of titanium, instead of flesh 
and bone. Then, if some brat bounced a toy truck off his noggin, he wouldn't care. He 
could have a computer-enhanced brain. And even if he was damaged, somehow, his parts 
could be immediately replaced. Problem solved!" But no-not problem solved-and not 
just because such things are currently impossible. Artificially fortifying Julian would have 
been the same as destroying him. Instead of his little three-year-old self, he would be a 
cold, steel-hard robot. That wouldn't be Julian. It would be a monster. I came to realize 
through such thoughts that what can be truly loved about a person is inseparable from 
their limitations. Julian wouldn't have been little and cute and lovable if he wasn't also 
prone to illness, and loss, and pain, and anxiety. Since I loved him a lot, I decided that he 
was all right the way he was, despite his fragility. 

It's been harder with my daughter. As her disease progressed, I began to piggy-back her 
around (not on my shoulders) when we went for walks. She started taking oral naproxen 
and methotrexate, the latter a powerful chemotherapy agent. She had a number of cortisol 
injections (wrists, shoulders, ankles, elbows, knees, hips, fingers, toes and tendons), all 
under general anaesthetic. This helped temporarily, but her decline continued. One day 
Tammy took Mikhaila to the zoo. She pushed her around in a wheelchair. 

That was not a good day. 

Her rheumatologist suggested prednisone, a corticosteroid, long used to fight 
inflammation. But prednisone has many side effects, not the least of which is severe facial 
swelling. It wasn't clear that this was better than the arthritis, not for a little girl. 
Fortunately, if that is the right word, the rheumatologist told us of a new drug. It had 
been used previously, but only on adults. So Mikhaila became the first Canadian child to 
receive etanercept, a "biological" specifically designed for autoimmune diseases. Tammy 
accidentally administered ten times the recommended dose the first few injections. Poof! 
Mikhaila was fixed. A few weeks after the trip to the zoo, she was zipping around, playing 
little league soccer. Tammy spent all summer just watching her run. 

We wanted Mikhaila to control as much of her life as she could. She had always been 
strongly motivated by money. One day we found her outside, surrounded by the books of 
her early childhood, selling them to passersby. I sat her down one evening and told her 
that I would give her fifty dollars if she could do the injection herself. She was eight. She 
struggled for thirty-five minutes, holding the needle close to her thigh. Then she did it. 
Next time I paid her twenty dollars, but only gave her ten minutes. Then it was ten 
dollars, and five minutes. We stayed at ten for quite a while. It was a bargain. 

After a few years, Mikhaila became completely symptom-free. The rheumatologist 
suggested that we start weaning her off her medications. Some children grow out of JIA 
when they hit puberty. No one knows why. She began to take methotrexate in pill form, 


228 


instead of injecting it. Things were good for four years. Then, one day, her elbow started 
to ache. We took her back to the hospital. "You only have one actively arthritic joint," 
said the rheumatologist's assistant. It wasn't "only." Two isn't much more than one, but 
one is a lot more than zero. One meant she hadn't grown out of her arthritis, despite the 
hiatus. The news demolished her for a month, but she was still in dance class and playing 
ball games with her friends on the street in front of our house. 

The rheumatologist had some more unpleasant things to say the next September, when 
Mikhaila started grade eleven. An MRI revealed joint deterioration at the hip. She told 
Mikhaila, "Your hip will have to be replaced before you turn thirty." Perhaps the damage 
had been done, before the etanercept worked its miracle? We didn't know. It was 
ominous news. One day, a few weeks after, Mikhaila was playing ball hockey in her high 
school gym. Her hip locked up. She had to hobble off the court. It started to hurt more 
and more. The rheumatologist said, "Some of your femur appears to be dead. You don't 
need a hip replacement when you're thirty. You need one now." 

As I sat with my client-as she discussed her husband's advancing illness-we 
discussed the fragility of life, the catastrophe of existence, and the sense of nihilism 
evoked by the spectre of death. I started with my thoughts about my son. She had asked, 
like everyone in her situation, "Why my husband? Why me? Why this?" My realization of 
the tight interlinking between vulnerability and Being was the best answer I had for her. I 
told her an old Jewish story, which I believe is part of the commentary on the Torah. It 
begins with a question, structured like a Zen koan. Imagine a Being who is omniscient, 
omnipresent, and omnipotent. What does such a Being lack? The answer? Limitation. 

If you are already everything, everywhere, always, there is nowhere to go and nothing to 
be. Everything that could be already is, and everything that could happen already has. And 
it is for this reason, so the story goes, that God created man. No limitation, no story. No 
story, no Being. That idea has helped me deal with the terrible fragility of Being. It helped 
my client, too. I don't want to overstate the significance of this. I don't want to claim that 
this somehow makes it all OK. She still faced the cancer afflicting her husband, just as I 
still faced my daughter's terrible illness. But there's something to be said for recognizing 
that existence and limitation are inextricably linked. 

Though thirty spokes may form the wheel, 
it is the hole within the hub 
which gives the wheel utility. 

It is not the clay the potter throws, 
which gives the pot its usefulness, 
but the space within the shape, 
from which the pot is made. 

Without a door, the room cannot be entered, 
and without its windows it is dark 
Such is the utility of non-existence. EiE 

A realization of this sort emerged more recently, in the pop culture world, during the 
evolution of the DC Comics cultural icon Superman. Superman was created in 1938 by 
Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster. In the beginning, he could move cars, trains and even ships. 
He could run faster than a locomotive. He could "leap over tall buildings in a single 
bound." As he developed over the next four decades, however, Superman's power began 
to expand. By the late sixties, he could fly faster than light. He had super-hearing and X- 
ray vision. He could blast heat-rays from his eyes. He could freeze objects and generate 
hurricanes with his breath. He could move entire planets. Nuclear blasts didn't faze him. 
And, if he did get hurt, somehow, he would immediately heal. Superman became 
invulnerable. 

Then a strange thing happened. He got boring. The more amazing his abilities became, 
the harder it was to think up interesting things for him to do. DC first overcame this 
problem in the 1940s. Superman became vulnerable to the radiation produced by 


229 


kryptonite, a material remnant of his shattered home planet. Eventually, more than two 
dozen variants emerged. Green kryptonite weakened Superman. In sufficient dosage, it 
could even kill him. Red caused him to behave strangely. Red-green caused him to mutate 
(he once grew a third eye in the back of his head). 

Other techniques were necessary to keep Superman's story compelling. In 1976, he was 
scheduled to battle Spiderman. It was the first superhero cross-over between Stan Lee's 
upstart Marvel Comics, with its less idealized characters, and DC, the owner of Superman 
and Batman. But Marvel had to augment Spiderman's powers for the battle to remain 
plausible. That broke the rules of the game. Spiderman is Spiderman because he has the 
powers of a spider. If he is suddenly granted any old power, he's not Spiderman. The plot 
falls apart. 

By the 1980s, Superman was suffering from terminal deus ex machina-a Latin term 
meaning "god from a machine." The term described the rescue of the imperilled hero in 
ancient Greek and Romans plays by the sudden and miraculous appearance of an all- 
powerful god. In badly written stories, to this very day, a character in trouble can be saved 
or a failing plot redeemed by a bit of implausible magic or other chicanery not in keeping 
with the reader's reasonable expectations. Sometimes Marvel Comics, for example, saves 
a failing story in exactly this manner. Lifeguard, for example, is an X-Man character who 
can develop whatever power is necessary to save a life. He's very handy to have around. 
Other examples abound in popular culture. At the end of Stephen King's The Stand, for 
example (spoiler alert), God Himself destroys the novel's evil characters. The entire ninth 
season (1985-86) of the primetime soap Dallas was later revealed as a dream. Lans object 
to such things, and rightly so. They've been ripped off. People following a story are 
willing to suspend disbelief as long as the limitations making the story possible are 
coherent and consistent. Writers, for their part, agree to abide by their initial decisions. 
When writers cheat, fans get annoyed. They want to toss the book in the fireplace, and 
throw a brick through the TV. 

And that became Superman's problem: he developed powers so extreme that he could 
"deus" himself out of anything, at any time. In consequence, in the 1980s, the franchise 
nearly died. Artist-writer John Byrne successfully rebooted it, rewriting Superman, 
retaining his biography, but depriving him of many of his new powers. He could no longer 
lift planets, or shrug off an H-bomb. He also became dependent on the sun for his power, 
like a reverse vampire. He gained some reasonable limitations. A superhero who can do 
anything turns out to be no hero at all. He's nothing specific, so he's nothing. He has 
nothing to strive against, so he can't be admirable. Being of any reasonable sort appears to 
require limitation. Perhaps this is because Being requires Becoming, perhaps, as well as 
mere static existence-and to become is to become something more, or at least 
something different. That is only possible for something limited. 

Pair enough. 

But what about the suffering caused by such limits? Perhaps the limits required by 
Being are so extreme that the whole project should just be scrapped. Dostoevsky 
expresses this idea very clearly in the voice of the protagonist of Notes from Underground: 
"So you see, you can say anything about world history-anything and everything that the 
most morbid imagination can think up. Except one thing, that is. It cannot be said that 
world history is reasonable. The word sticks in one's throat.'? Goethe's 
Mephistopheles, the adversary of Being, announces his opposition explicitly to God's 
creation in Faust, as we have seen. Years later, Goethe wrote Faust, Part II. He has the 
Devil repeat his credo, in a slightly different form, just to hammer home the point:- 

Gone, to sheer Nothing, past with null made one! 

What matters our creative endless toil. 

When, at a snatch, oblivion ends the coil? 

"It is by-gone"-How shall this riddle run? 


230 


As good as if things never had begun. 

Yet circle back, existence to possess: 

I'd rather have Eternal Emptiness. 

Anyone can understand such words, when a dream collapses, a marriage ends, or a family 
member is struck down by a devastating disease. How can reality be structured so 
unbearably? How can this be? 

Perhaps, as the Columbine boys suggested (see Rule 6), it would be better not to be at 
all. Perhaps it would be even better if there was no Being at all. But people who come to 
the former conclusion are flirting with suicide, and those who come to the latter with 
something worse, something truly monstrous. They're consorting with the idea of the 
destruction of everything. They are toying with genocide-and worse. Even the darkest 
regions have still darker corners. And what is truly horrifying is that such conclusions are 
understandable, maybe even inevitable-although not inevitably acted upon. What is a 
reasonable person to think when faced, for example, with a suffering child? Is it not 
precisely the reasonable person, the compassionate person, who would find such 
thoughts occupying his mind? How could a good God allow such a world as this to exist? 

Logical they might be. Understandable, they might be. But there is a terrible catch to 
such conclusions. Acts undertaken in keeping with them (if not the thoughts themselves) 
inevitably serve to make a bad situation even worse. Hating life, despising life-even for 
the genuine pain that life inflicts-merely serves to make life itself worse, unbearably 
worse. There is no genuine protest in that. There is no goodness in that, only the desire 
to produce suffering, for the sake of suffering. That is the very essence of evil. People who 
come to that kind of thinking are one step from total mayhem. Sometimes they merely 
lack the tools. Sometimes, like Stalin, they have their finger on the nuclear button. 

But is there any coherent alternative, given the self-evident horrors of existence? Can 
Being itself, with its malarial mosquitoes, child soldiers and degenerative neurological 
diseases, truly be justified? I'm not sure I could have formulated a proper answer to such 
a question in the nineteenth century, before the totalitarian horrors of the twentieth were 
monstrously perpetrated on millions of people. I don't know that it's possible to 
understand why such doubts are morally impermissible without the fact of the Holocaust 
and the Stalinist purges and Mao's catastrophic Great Leap Porward. And I also don't 
think it is possible to answer the question by thinking. Thinking leads inexorably to the 
abyss. It did not work for Tolstoy. It might not even have worked for Nietzsche, who 
arguably thought more clearly about such things than anyone in history. But if it is not 
thinking that can be relied upon in the direst of situations, what is left? Thought, after all, 
is the highest of human achievements, is it not? 

Perhaps not. 

Something supersedes thinking, despite its truly awesome power. When existence 
reveals itself as existentially intolerable, thinking collapses in on itself. In such situations 
-in the depths-it's noticing, not thinking, that does the trick. Perhaps you might start by 
noticing this: when you love someone, it's not despite their limitations. It's because of their 
limitations. Of course, it's complicated. You don't have to be in love with every 
shortcoming, and merely accept. You shouldn't stop trying to make life better, or let 
suffering just be. But there appear to be limits on the path to improvement beyond which 
we might not want to go, lest we sacrifice our humanity itself. Of course, it's one thing to 
say, "Being requires limitation," and then to go about happily, when the sun is shining 
and your father is free of Alzheimer's disease and your kids are healthy and your marriage 
happy. But when things go wrong? 

Disintegration and Pain 


231 


Mikhaila stayed awake many nights when she was in pain. When her grandfather came to 
visit, he gave her a few of his Tylenol 3s, which contain codeine. Then she could sleep. 
But not for long. Our rheumatologist, instrumental in producing Mikhaila's remission, hit 
the limit of her courage when dealing with our child's pain. She had once prescribed 
opiates to a young girl, who became addicted. She swore never to do so again. She said, 
"Have you tried ibuprofen?" Mikhaila learned then that doctors don't know everything. 
Ibuprofen for her was a crumb of bread for a starving man. 

We talked to a new doctor. He listened carefully. Then he helped Mikhaila. First, he 
prescribed T3s, the same medication her grandfather had briefly shared. This was brave. 
Physicians face a lot of pressure to avoid the prescription of opiates-not least to children. 
But opiates work. Soon, however, the Tylenol was insufficient. She started taking 
oxycontin, an opioid known pejoratively as hillbilly heroin. This controlled her pain, but 
produced other problems. Tammy took Mikhaila out for lunch a week after the 
prescription started. She could have been drunk. Her speech was slurred. Her head 
nodded. This was not good. 

My sister-in-law is a palliative care nurse. She thought we could add Ritalin, an 
amphetamine often used for hyperactive kids, to the oxycontin. The Ritalin restored 
Mikhaila's alertness and had some pain-suppressing qualities of its own (this is a very a 
good thing to know if you are ever faced with someone's intractable suffering). But her 
pain became increasingly excruciating. She started to fall. Then her hip seized up on her 
again, this time in the subway on a day when the escalator was not working. Her 
boyfriend carried her up the stairs. She took a cab home. The subway was no longer a 
reliable form of transportation. That March we bought Mikhaila a 50cc motor scooter. It 
was dangerous to let her ride it. It was also dangerous for her to lack all freedom. We 
chose the former danger. She passed her learner's exam, which allowed her to pilot the 
vehicle during the day. She was given a few months to progress towards her permanent 
licence. 

In May her hip was replaced. The surgeon was even able to adjust for a pre-existent half 
centimetre difference in leg length. The bone hadn't died, either. That was only a shadow 
on the x-ray. Her aunt and her grandparents came to see her. We had some better days. 
Immediately after the surgery, however, Mikhaila was placed in an adult rehabilitation 
centre. She was the youngest person in the place, by about sixty years. Her aged 
roommate, very neurotic, wouldn't allow the lights to be off, even at night. The old 
woman couldn't make it to the toilet and had to use a bedpan. She couldn't stand to have 
the door to her room closed. But it was right beside the nurses' station, with its continual 
alarm bells and loud conversations. There was no sleeping there, where sleeping was 
required. No visitors were allowed after 7 p.m. The physio-the very reason for her 
placement-was on vacation. The only person who helped her was the janitor, who 
volunteered to move her to a multi-bed ward when she told the on-duty nurse that she 
couldn't sleep. This was the same nurse who had laughed when she'd found out which 
room Mikhaila had been assigned to. 

She was supposed to be there for six weeks. She was there three days. When the 
vacationing physio returned, Mikhaila climbed the rehab-centre stairs and immediately 
mastered her additional required exercises. While she was doing that, we outfitted our 
home with the necessary handrails. Then we took her home. All that pain and surgery- 
she handled that fine. The appalling rehab centre? That produced post-traumatic stress 
symptoms. 

Mikhaila enrolled in a full-fledged motorcycle course in June, so she could continue 
legally using her scooter. We were all terrified by this necessity. What if she fell? What if 
she had an accident? On the first day, Mikhaila trained on a real motorcycle. It was heavy. 
She dropped it several times. She saw another beginning rider tumble and roll across the 


232 



parking lot where the course was held. On the morning of the second day of the course, 
she was afraid to return. She didn't want to leave her bed. We talked for a good while, 
and jointly decided that she should at least drive back with Tammy to the site where the 
training took place. If she couldn't manage it, she could stay in the car until the course 
finished. En route, her courage returned. When she received her certificate, everyone else 
enrolled stood and applauded. 

Then her right ankle disintegrated. Her doctors wanted to fuse the large affected bones 
into one piece. But that would have caused the other, smaller bones in her foot-now 
facing additional pressure-to deteriorate. That's not so intolerable, perhaps, when you're 
eighty (although it's no picnic then either). But it's no solution when you're in your 
teens. We insisted upon an artificial replacement, although the technology was new. 
There was a three year-waiting list. This was simply not manageable. The damaged ankle 
produced much more pain than her previously failing hip. One bad night she became 
erratic and illogical. I couldn't calm her down. I knew she was at her breaking point. To 
call that stressful is to say almost nothing. 

We spent weeks and then months desperately investigating all sorts of replacement 
devices, trying to assess their suitability. We looked everywhere for quicker surgery: 
India, China, Spain, the UK, Costa Rica, Florida. We contacted the Ontario Provincial 
Ministry of Health. They were very helpful. They located a specialist across the country, in 
Vancouver. Mikhaila's ankle was replaced in November. Post-surgery, she was in absolute 
agony. Her foot was mispositioned. The cast was compressing skin against bone. The 
clinic was unwilling to give her enough oxycontin to control her pain. She had built up a 
high level of tolerance because of her previous use. 

When she returned home, in less pain, Mikhaila started to taper off the opiates. She 
hated oxycontin, despite its evident utility. She said it turned her life grey. Perhaps that 
was a good thing, under the circumstances. She stopped using it as soon as possible. She 
suffered through withdrawal for months, with night sweating and formication (the 
sensation of ants crawling upside down under her skin). She became unable to experience 
any pleasure. That was another effect of opiate withdrawal. 

During much of this period, we were overwhelmed. The demands of everyday life don't 
stop, just because you have been laid low by a catastrophe. Everything that you always do 
still has to be done. So how do you manage? Here are some things we learned: 

Set aside some time to talk and to think about the illness or other crisis and how it 
should be managed every day. Do not talk or think about it otherwise. If you do not limit 
its effect, you will become exhausted, and everything will spiral into the ground. This is 
not helpful. Conserve your strength. You're in a war, not a battle, and a war is composed 
of many battles. You must stay functional through all of them. When worries associated 
with the crisis arise at other times, remind yourself that you will think them through, 
during the scheduled period. This usually works. The parts of your brain that generate 
anxiety are more interested in the fact that there is a plan than in the details of the plan. 
Don't schedule your time to think in the evening or at night. Then you won't be able to 
sleep. If you can't sleep, then everything will go rapidly downhill. 

Shift the unit of time you use to frame your life. When the sun is shining, and times are 
good, and the crops are bountiful, you can make your plans for the next month, and the 
next year, and the next five years. You can even dream a decade ahead. But you can't do 
that when your leg is clamped firmly in a crocodile's jaws. "Sufficient unto the day are the 
evils thereof'-that is Matthew 6:34. It is often interpreted as "live in the present, 
without a care for tomorrow." This is not what it means. That injunction must be 
interpreted in the context of the Sermon on the Mount, of which it is an integral part. 
That sermon distills the ten "Thou-shalt-nots" of the Commandments of Moses into a 
single prescriptive "Thou shalt." Christ enjoins His followers to place faith in God's 


233 



Heavenly Kingdom, and the truth. That's a conscious decision to presume the primary 
goodness of Being. That's an act of courage. Aim high, like Pinocchio's Geppetto. Wish 
upon a star, and then act properly, in accordance with that aim. Once you are aligned with 
the heavens, you can concentrate on the day. Be careful. Put the things you can control in 
order. Repair what is in disorder, and make what is already good better. It is possible that 
you can manage, if you are careful. People are very tough. People can survive through 
much pain and loss. But to persevere they must see the good in Being. If they lose that, 
they are truly lost. 

Dogs, Again-But Finally, Cats 

Dogs are like people. They are the friends and allies of human beings. They are social, 
hierarchical, and domesticated. They are happy at the bottom of the family pyramid. They 
pay for the attention they receive with loyalty, admiration, and love. Dogs are great. 

Cats, however, are their own creatures. They aren't social or hierarchical (except in 
passing). They are only semi-domesticated. They don't do tricks. They are friendly on 
their own terms. Dogs have been tamed, but cats have made a decision. They appear 
willing to interact with people, for some strange reasons of their own. To me, cats are a 
manifestation of nature, of Being, in an almost pure form. Furthermore, they are a form of 
Being that looks at human beings and approves. 

When you meet a cat on a street, many things can happen. If I see a cat at a distance, 
for example, the evil part of me wants to startle it with a loud pfft! sound-front teeth 
over bottom lip. That will make a nervous cat puff up its fur and stand sideways so it 
looks larger. Maybe I shouldn't laugh at cats, but it's hard to resist. The fact that they can 
be startled is one of the best things about them (along with the fact that they are instantly 
disgruntled and embarrassed by their overreaction). But when I have myself under proper 
control, I'll bend down, and call the cat over, so I can pet it. Sometimes, it will run away. 
Sometimes, it will ignore me completely, because it's a cat. But sometimes the cat will 
come over to me, push its head against my waiting hand, and be pleased about it. 
Sometimes it will even roll over, and arch its back against the dusty concrete (although 
cats positioned in that manner will often bite and claw even a friendly hand). 

Across the street on which I live is a cat named Ginger. Ginger is a Siamese, a beautiful 
cat, very calm and self-possessed. She is low in the Big Five personality trait of 
neuroticism, which is an index of anxiety, fear and emotional pain. Ginger is not at all 
bothered by dogs. Our dog, Sikko, is her friend. Sometimes when you call her- 
sometimes of her own accord-Ginger will trot across the street, tail held high, with a 
little kink at the end. Then she will roll on her back in front of Sikko, who wags his tail 
happily as a consequence. Afterward, if she feels like it, she might come visit you, for a 
half a minute. It's a nice break. It's a little extra light, on a good day, and a tiny respite, on 
a bad day. 

If you pay careful attention, even on a bad day, you may be fortunate enough to be 
confronted with small opportunities of just that sort. Maybe you will see a little girl 
dancing on the street because she is all dressed up in a ballet costume. Maybe you will 
have a particularly good cup of coffee in a cafe that cares about their customers. Maybe 
you can steal ten or twenty minutes to do some little ridiculous thing that distracts you or 
reminds you that you can laugh at the absurdity of existence. Personally, I like to watch a 
Simpsons episode at 1.5 times regular speed: all the laughs; two-thirds the time. 

And maybe when you are going for a walk and your head is spinning a cat will show up 
and if you pay attention to it then you will get a reminder for just fifteen seconds that the 
wonder of Being might make up for the ineradicable suffering that accompanies it. 

Pet a cat when you encounter one on the street. 


234 



P.S. Soon after I wrote this chapter, Mikhaila's surgeon told her that her artificial ankle 
would have to be removed, and her ankle fused. Amputation waited down that road. She 
had been in pain for eight years, since the replacement surgery, and her mobility 
remained significantly impaired, although both were much better than before. Four days 
later she happened upon a new physiotherapist. He was a large, powerful, attentive 
person. He had specialized in ankle treatment in the UK, in London. He placed his hands 
around her ankle and compressed it for forty seconds, while Mikhaila moved her foot back 
and forth. A mispositioned bone slipped back where it belonged. Her pain disappeared. 
She never cries in front of medical personnel, but she burst into tears. Her knee 
straightened up. Now she can walk long distances, and traipse around in her bare feet. 
The calf muscle on her damaged leg is growing back. She has much more flexion in the 
artificial joint. This year, she got married and had a baby girl, Elizabeth, named after my 
wife's departed mother. 

Things are good. 

For now. 


235 



a 


236 


Coda 


WHAT SHALL I DO WITH MY NEWFOUND PEN OF LIGHT? 

In late 2016 I travelled to northern California to meet a friend and business associate. We 
spent an evening together thinking and talking. At one point he took a pen from his 
jacket and took a few notes. It was LED-equipped and beamed light out its tip, so that 
writing in the dark was made easier. "Just another gadget," I thought. Later, however, in a 
more metaphorical frame of mind, I was struck quite deeply by the idea of a pen of light. 
There was something symbolic about it, something metaphysical. We're all in the dark, 
after all, much of the time. We could all use something written with light to guide us 
along our way. I told him I wanted to do some writing, while we sat and conversed, and I 
asked him if he would give me the pen, as a gift. When he handed it over, I found myself 
inordinately pleased. Now I could write illuminated words in the darkness! Obviously, it 
was important to do such a thing properly. So I said to myself, in all seriousness, "What 
shall I do with my newfound pen of light?" There are two verses in the New Testament 
that pertain to such things. I've thought about them a lot: 

Ask, and it shall given to you; Seek, and ye shall find; Knock, and it shall be open unto you: For everyone who 

asks receives; the one who seeks finds; and to the one who knocks, the door will be opened (Matthew 7:7-7:8) 

At first glance, this seems like nothing but a testament to the magic of prayer, in the 
sense of entreating God to grant favours. But God, whatever or whoever He may be, is no 
simple granter of wishes. When tempted by the Devil himself, in the desert-as we saw in 
Rule 7 (Pursue what is meaningful [not what is expedient])-even Christ Himself was 
not willing to call upon his Father for a favour; furthermore, every day, the prayers of 
desperate people go unanswered. But maybe this is because the questions they contain 
are not phrased in the proper manner. Perhaps it's not reasonable to ask God to break the 
rules of physics every time we fall by the wayside or make a serious error. Perhaps, in 
such times, you can't put the cart before the horse and simply wish for your problem to 
be solved in some magical manner. Perhaps you could ask, instead, what you might have 
to do right now to increase your resolve, buttress your character, and find the strength to 
go on. Perhaps you could instead ask to see the truth. 

On many occasions in our nearly thirty years of marriage my wife and I have had a 
disagreement-sometimes a deep disagreement. Our unity appeared to be broken, at 
some unknowably profound level, and we were not able to easily resolve the rupture by 
talking. We became trapped, instead, in emotional, angry and anxious argument. We 
agreed that when such circumstances arose we would separate, briefly: she to one room, 
me to another. This was often quite difficult, because it is hard to disengage in the heat of 
an argument, when anger generates the desire to defeat and win. But it seemed better 
than risking the consequences of a dispute that threatened to spiral out of control. 

Alone, trying to calm down, we would each ask ourselves the same single question: 
What had we each done to contribute to the situation we were arguing about? However small, 
however distant ...we had each made some error. Then we would reunite, and share the results 
of our questioning: Here's how I was wrong .... 

The problem with asking yourself such a question is that you must truly want the 
answer. And the problem with doing that is that you won't like the answer. When you are 
arguing with someone, you want to be right, and you want the other person to be wrong. 
Then it's them that has to sacrifice something and change, not you, and that's much 
preferable. If it's you that's wrong and you that must change, then you have to reconsider 


237 



yourself-your memories of the past, your manner of being in the present, and your plans 
for the future. Then you must resolve to improve and figure out how to do that. Then you 
actually have to do it. That's exhausting. It takes repeated practice, to instantiate the new 
perceptions and make the new actions habitual. It's much easier just not to realize, admit 
and engage. It's much easier to turn your attention away from the truth and remain 
wilfully blind. 

But it's at such a point that you must decide whether you want to be right or you want 
to have peace. You must decide whether to insist upon the absolute correctness of your 
view, or to listen and negotiate. You don't get peace by being right. You just get to be 
right, while your partner gets to be wrong-defeated and wrong. Do that ten thousand 
times and your marriage will be over (or you will wish it was). To choose the alternative 
-to seek peace-you have to decide that you want the answer, more than you want to be 
right. That's the way out of the prison of your stubborn preconceptions. That's the 
prerequisite for negotiation. That's to truly abide by principle of Rule 2 (Treat yourself 
like someone you are responsible for helping). 

My wife and I learned that if you ask yourself such a question, and you genuinely desire 
the answer (no matter how disgraceful and terrible and shameful), then a memory of 
something you did that was stupid and wrong at some point in the generally not-distant- 
enough past will arise from the depths of your mind. Then you can go back to your 
partner and reveal why you're an idiot, and apologize (sincerely) and that person can do 
the same for you, and then apologize (sincerely), and then you two idiots will be able to 
talk again. Perhaps that is true prayer: the question, "What have I done wrong, and what 
can I do now to set things at least a little bit more right?" But your heart must be open to 
the terrible truth. You must be receptive to that which you do not want to hear. When 
you decide to learn about your faults, so that they can be rectified, you open a line of 
communication with the source of all revelatory thought. Maybe that's the same thing as 
consulting your conscience. Maybe that's the same thing, in some manner, as a discussion 
with God. 

It was in that spirit, with some paper in front of me, that I asked my question: What 
shall I do with my newfound pen of light? I asked, as if I truly wanted the answer. I waited for 
a reply. I was holding a conversation between two different elements of myself. I was 
genuinely thinking-or listening, in the sense described in Rule 9 (Assume that the 
person you are listening to might know something you don't). That rule can apply as 
much to yourself as to others. It was me, of course, who asked the question-and it was 
me, of course, who replied. But those two me's were not the same. I did not know what 
the answer would be. I was waiting for it to appear in the theatre of my imagination. I was 
waiting for the words to spring out of the void. How can a person think up something 
that surprises him? How can he already not know what he thinks? Where do new 
thoughts come from? Who or what thinks them? 

Since I had just been given, of all things, a Pen of Light, which could write Illuminated 
Words in the darkness, I wanted to do the best thing I could with it. So, I asked the 
appropriate question-and, almost immediately, an answer revealed itself: Write down the 
words you want inscribed on your soul. I wrote that down. That seemed pretty good-a little 
on the romantic side, granted-but that was in keeping with the game. Then I upped the 
ante. I decided to ask myself the hardest questions I could think up, and await their 
answers. If you have a Pen of Light, after all, you should use it to answer Difficult 
Questions. Here was the first: What shall I do tomorrow? The answer came: The most good 
possible in the shortest period of time. That was satisfying, as well-conjoining an ambitious 
aim with the demands of maximal efficiency. A worthy challenge. The second question 
was in the same vein: What shall I do next year? Try to ensure that the good I do then will be 
exceeded only by the good I do the year after that. That seemed solid, too-a nice extension of 


238 


the ambitions detailed in the previous answer. I told my friend that I was trying a serious 
experiment in writing with the pen he had given to me. I asked if I could read aloud what 
I had composed so far. The questions-and the answers-struck a chord with him, too. 
That was good. That was impetus to continue. 

The next question ended the first set: What shall I do with my life? Aim for Paradise, and 
concentrate on today. Hah! I knew what that meant. It's what Geppetto does in the Disney 
movie Pinocchio, when he wishes upon a star. The grandfatherly woodcarver lifts up his 
eyes to the twinkling diamond set high above the mundane world of day-to-day human 
concerns and articulates his deepest desire: that the marionette he created lose the strings 
by which he is manipulated by others and transform himself into a real boy. It's also the 
central message of the Sermon on the Mount, as we saw in Rule 4 (Compare yourself to 
who you were yesterday ...), but which deserve repeating here: 

And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do 
they spin: And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. 
Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he 
not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith? Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or. What 
shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? For your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all 
these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added 
unto you (Matthew 6:28-6:33). 

What does all that mean? Orient yourself properly. Then-and only then-concentrate on 
the day. Set your sights at the Good, the Beautiful, and the True, and then focus pointedly 
and carefully on the concerns of each moment. Aim continually at Heaven while you work 
diligently on Earth. Attend fully to the future, in that manner, while attending fully to the 
present. Then you have the best chance of perfecting both. 

I turned, then, from the use of time to my relationships with people, and wrote down 
and then read these questions and answers to my friend: What shall I do with my wife? Treat 
her as if she is the Holy Mother of God, so that she may give birth to the world-redeeming hero. 
What shall I do with my daughter? Stand behind her, listen to her, guard her, train her mind, and let 
her know it's OK if she wants to be a mother. What shall I do with my parents? Act such that your 
actions justify the suffering they endured. What shall I do with my son? Encourage him to be a true 
Son of God. 

To honour your wife as a Mother of God is to notice and support the sacred element of her 
role as mother (not just of your children, but as such). A society that forgets this cannot 
survive. Hitler's mother gave birth to Hitler, and Stalin's mother to Stalin. Was 
something amiss in their crucial relationships? It seems likely, given the importance of 
the maternal role in establishing trust -to take a single vital example. Perhaps the 
importance of their motherly duties, and of their relationship with their children, was not 
properly stressed; perhaps what the women were doing in their maternal guise was not 
properly regarded by husband, father and society alike. Who instead might a woman 
produce if she was treated properly, honourably and carefully? After all, the fate of the 
world rests on each new infant-tiny, fragile and threatened but, in time, capable of 
uttering the words and doing the deeds that maintain the eternal, delicate balance 
between chaos and order. 

To stand behind my daughter? That's to encourage her, in everything she wants 
courageously to do, but to include in that genuine appreciation for the fact of her 
femininity: to recognize the importance of having a family and children and to forego the 
temptation to denigrate or devalue that in comparison to accomplishment of personal 
ambition or career. It's not for nothing that the Holy Mother and Infant is a divine image 
-as we just discussed. Societies that cease to honour that image-that cease to see that 
relationship as of transcendent and fundamental importance-also cease to be. 

To act to justify the suffering of your parents is to remember all the sacrifices that all the 
others who lived before you (not least your parents) have made for you in all the course 


239 


of the terrible past, to be grateful for all the progress that has been thereby made, and 
then to act in accordance with that remembrance and gratitude. People sacrificed 
immensely to bring about what we have now. In many cases, they literally died for it-and 
we should act with some respect for that fact. 

To encourage my son to be a true Son of God? That is to want him above all to do what is 
right, and to strive to have his back while he is doing so. That is, I think, part of the 
sacrificial message: to value and support your son's commitment to transcendent good 
above all things (including his worldly progress, so to speak, and his safety-and, 
perhaps, even his life). 

I continued asking questions. The answers came within seconds. What shall I do with the 
stranger? Invite him into my house, and treat him like a brother, so that he may become one. That's 
to extend the hand of trust to someone so that his or her best part can step forward and 
reciprocate. That's to manifest the sacred hospitality that makes life between those who 
do not yet know each other possible. What shall I do with a fallen soul? Offer a genuine and 
cautious hand, but do not join it in the mire. That's a good summary of what we covered in 
Rule 3 (Make friends with people who want the best for you). That's an injunction to 
refrain both from casting pearls before swine, and from camouflaging your vice with 
virtue. What shall I do with the world? Conduct myself as if Being is more valuable than Non- 
Being. Act so that you are not made bitter and corrupt by the tragedy of existence. That's 
the essence of Rule 1 (Stand up straight with your shoulders back): confront the 
uncertainty of the world voluntarily, and with faith and courage. 

How shall I educate my people? Share with them those things I regard as truly important. That's 
Rule 8 (Tell the truth-or, at least, don't lie). That is to aim for wisdom, to distill that 
wisdom into words, and to speak forth those words as if they matter, with true concern 
and care. That's all relevant, as well, to the next question (and answer): What shall I do 
with a torn nation? Stitch it back together with careful words of truth. The importance of this 
injunction has, if anything, become clearer over the past few years: we are dividing, and 
polarizing, and drifting toward chaos. It is necessary, under such conditions, if we are to 
avoid catastrophe, for each of us to bring forward the truth, as we see it: not the 
arguments that justify our ideologies, not the machinations that further our ambitions, 
but the stark pure facts of our existence, revealed for others to see and contemplate, so 
that we can find common ground and proceed together. 

What shall I do for God my Father? Sacrifice everything I hold dear to yet greater perfection. Let 
the deadwood burn off, so that new growth can prevail. That's the terrible lesson of Cain 
and Abel, detailed in the discussion of meaning surrounding Rule 7. What shall I do with a 
lying man? Let him speak so that he may reveal himself. Rule 9 (Listen ...) is once again 
relevant here, as is another section of the New Testament: 

Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree 
bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, 
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and 
cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them (Matthew 7:16-7:20). 

The rot must be revealed before something sound can be put in its place, as was also 
indicated in Rule 7's elaboration-and all of this is pertinent to understanding the 
following question and answer: How shall I deal with the enlightened one? Replace him with the 
true seeker of enlightenment. There is no enlightened one. There is only the one who is 
seeking further enlightenment. Proper Being is process, not a state; a journey, not a 
destination. It's the continual transformation of what you know, through encounter with 
what you don't know, rather than the desperate clinging to the certainty that is eternally 
insufficient in any case. That accounts for the importance of Rule 4 (Compare yourself 
...). Always place your becoming above your current being. That means it is necessary to 


240 



recognize and accept your insufficiency, so that it can be continually rectified. That's 
painful, certainly-but it's a good deal. 

The next few Q_ & A's made another coherent group, focused this time on ingratitude: 
What shall I do when I despise what I have? Remember those who have nothing and strive to be 
grateful. Take stock of what is right in front of you. Consider Rule 12-somewhat tongue- 
in-cheek-(Pet a cat when you encounter one on the street). Consider, as well, that you 
may be blocked in your progress not because you lack opportunity, but because you have 
been too arrogant to make full use of what already lies in front of you. That's Rule 6 (Set 
your house in perfect order before you criticize the world). 

I spoke recently with a young man about such things. He had barely ever left his family 
and never his home state-but he journeyed to Toronto to attend one of my lectures and 
to meet with me at my home. He had isolated himself far too severely in the short course 
of his life to date and was badly plagued by anxiety. When we first met, he could hardly 
speak. He had nonetheless determined in the last year to do something about all of that. 
He started by taking on the lowly job of dishwasher. He decided to do it well, when he 
could have treated it contemptuously. Intelligent enough to be embittered by a world that 
did not recognize his gifts, he decided instead to accept with the genuine humility that is 
the true precursor to wisdom whatever opportunity he could find. Now he lives on his 
own. That's better than living at home. Now he has some money. Not much. But more 
than none. And he earned it. Now he is confronting the social world, and benefitting from 
the ensuing conflict: 

Knowledge frequently results 
from knowing others, 
but the man who is awakened, 
has seen the uncarved block. 

Others might be mastered by force, 
but to master one's self 
requires the Tao. 

He who has many material things, 

may be described as rich, 

but he who knows he has enough, 

and is at one with the Tao, 

might have enough of material things 

and have self-being as well. 1 . 

As long as my still-anxious but self-transforming and determined visitor continues down 
his current path, he will become far more competent and accomplished, and it won't take 
long. But this will only be because he accepted his lowly state and was sufficiently 
grateful to take the first equally lowly step away from it. That's far preferable to waiting, 
endlessly, for the magical arrival of Godot. That's far preferable to arrogant, static, 
unchanging existence, while the demons of rage, resentment and unlived life gather 
around. 

What shall I do when greed consumes me? Remember that it is truly better to give than to receive. 
The world is a forum of sharing and trading (that's Rule 7, again), not a treasure-house 
for the plundering. To give is to do what you can to make things better. The good in 
people will respond to that, and support it, and imitate it, and multiply it, and return it, 
and foster it, so that everything improves and moves forward. 

What shall I do when I ruin my rivers? Seek for the living water and let it cleanse the Earth. I 
found this question, as well as its answer, particularly unexpected. It seems most 
associated with Rule 6 (Set your house ...). Perhaps our environmental problems are not 
best construed technically. Maybe they're best considered psychologically. The more 
people sort themselves out, the more responsibility they will take for the world around 
them and the more problems they will solve.  It is better, proverbially, to rule your own 
spirit than to rule a city. It's easier to subdue an enemy without than one within. Maybe 


241 


the environmental problem is ultimately spiritual. If we put ourselves in order, perhaps 
we will do the same for the world. Of course, what else would a psychologist think? 

The next set were associated with proper response to crisis and exhaustion: 

What shall I do when my enemy succeeds? Aim a little higher and be grateful for the lesson. Back 
to Matthew: "Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and 
hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do 
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute 
you; That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven" (5:43-5:45). What 
does this mean? Learn, from the success of your enemies; listen (Rule 9) to their critique, 
so that you can glean from their opposition whatever fragments of wisdom you might 
incorporate, to your betterment; adopt as your ambition the creation of a world in which 
those who work against you see the light and wake up and succeed, so that the better at 
which you are aiming can encompass them, too. 

What shall I do when I'm tired and impatient? Gratefully accept an outstretched helping hand. 
This is something with a twofold meaning. It's an injunction, first, to note the reality of 
the limitations of individual being and, second, to accept and be thankful for the support 
of others-family, friends, acquaintances and strangers alike. Exhaustion and impatience 
are inevitable. There is too much to be done and too little time in which to do it. But we 
don't have to strive alone, and there is nothing but good in distributing the 
responsibilities, cooperating in the efforts, and sharing credit for the productive and 
meaningful work thereby undertaken. 

What shall I do with the fact of aging? Replace the potential of my youth with the 
accomplishments of my maturity. This hearkens back to the discussion of friendship 
surrounding Rule 3, and the story of Socrates' trial and death-which might be 
summarized, as follows: A life lived thoroughly justifies its own limitations. The young man 
with nothing has his possibilities to set against the accomplishments of his elders. It's not 
clear that it's necessarily a bad deal, for either. "An aged man is but a paltry thing," wrote 
William Butler Yeats, "A tattered coat upon a stick, unless/Soul clap its hands and sing, 
and louder sing/For every tatter in its mortal dress ,..." 220 

What shall I do with my infant's death? Hold my other loved ones and heal their pain. It is 
necessary to be strong in the face of death, because death is intrinsic to life. It is for this 
reason that I tell my students: aim to be the person at your father's funeral that everyone, 
in their grief and misery, can rely on. There's a worthy and noble ambition: strength in 
the face of adversity. That is very different from the wish for a life free of trouble. 

What shall I do in the next dire moment? Focus my attention on the next right move. The flood 
is coming. The flood is always coming. The apocalypse is always upon us. That's why the 
story of Noah is archetypal. Things fall apart-we stressed that in the discussion 
surrounding Rule 10 (Be precise in your speech)-and the centre cannot hold. When 
everything has become chaotic and uncertain, all that remains to guide you might be the 
character you constructed, previously, by aiming up and concentrating on the moment at 
hand. If you have failed in that, you will fail in the moment of crisis, and then God help 
you. 

That last set contained what I thought were the most difficult of all the questions I 
asked that night. The death of a child is, perhaps, the worst of catastrophes. Many 
relationships fail in the aftermath of such a tragedy. But dissolution in the face of such 
horror is not inevitable, although it is understandable. I have seen people immensely 
strengthen their remaining family bonds when someone close to them has died. I have 
seen them turn to those who remained and redouble their efforts to connect with them 
and support them. Because of that, all regained at least some of what had been so terribly 
torn away by death. We must therefore commiserate in our grief. We must come together 


242 



in the face of the tragedy of existence. Our families can be the living room with the 
fireplace that is cozy and welcoming and warm while the storms of winter rage outside. 

The heightened knowledge of fragility and mortality produced by death can terrify, 
embitter and separate. It can also awaken. It can remind those who grieve not to take the 
people who love them for granted. Once I did some chilling calculations regarding my 
parents, who are in their eighties. It was an example of the hated arithmetic we 
encountered in the discussion of Rule 5 (Do not let your children do anything that makes 
you dislike them)-and I walked through the equations so that I would stay properly 
conscious. I see my Mom and Dad about twice a year. We generally spend several weeks 
together. We talk on the phone in the interim between visits. But the life expectancy of 
people in their eighties is under ten years. That means I am likely to see my parents, if I 
am fortunate, fewer than twenty more times. That's a terrible thing to know. But knowing 
it puts a stop to my taking those opportunities for granted. 

The next set of questions-and answers-had to do with the development of character. 
What shall I say to a faithless brother? The King of the Damned is a poor judge of Being. It is my 
firm belief that the best way to fix the world-a handyman's dream, if ever there was one 
-is to fix yourself, as we discussed in Rule 6. Anything else is presumptuous. Anything 
else risks harm, stemming from your ignorance and lack of skill. But that's OK. There's 
plenty to do, right where you are. After all, your specific personal faults detrimentally 
affect the world. Your conscious, voluntary sins (because no other word really works) 
makes things worse than they have to be. Your inaction, inertia and cynicism removes 
from the world that part of you that could learn to quell suffering and make peace. That's 
not good. There are endless reasons to despair of the world, and to become angry and 
resentful and to seek revenge. 

Failure to make the proper sacrifices, failure to reveal yourself, failure to live and tell 
the truth-all that weakens you. In that weakened state, you will be unable to thrive in 
the world, and you will be of no benefit to yourself or to others. You will fail and suffer, 
stupidly. That will corrupt your soul. How could it be otherwise? Life is hard enough 
when it is going well. But when it's going badly? And I have learned through painful 
experience that nothing is going so badly that it can't be made worse. This is why Hell is 
a bottomless pit. This is why Hell is associated with that aforementioned sin. In the most 
awful of cases, the terrible suffering of unfortunate souls becomes attributable, by their 
own judgment, to mistakes they made knowingly in the past: acts of betrayal, deception, 
cruelty, carelessness, cowardice and, most commonly of all, willful blindness. To suffer 
terribly and to know yourself as the cause: that is Hell. And once in Hell it is very easy to 
curse Being itself. And no wonder. But it's not justifiable. And that's why the King of the 
Damned is a poor judge of Being. 

How do you build yourself into someone on whom you can rely, in the best of times 
and the worst-in peace and in war? How do you build for yourself the kind of character 
that will not ally itself, in its suffering and misery, with all who dwell in Hell? The 
questions and answers continued, all pertinent, in one way or another, to the rules I have 
outlined in this book: 

What shall I do to strengthen my spirit? Do not tell lies, or do what you despise. 

What shall I do to ennoble my body? Use it only in the service of my soul. 

What shall I do with the most difficult of questions? Consider them the gateway to the path of life. 

What shall I do with the poor man's plight? Strive through right example to lift his broken heart. 

What shall I do when the great crowd beckons? Stand tall and utter my broken truths. 

And that was that. I still have my Pen of Light. I haven't written anything with it since. 
Maybe I will again when the mood strikes and something wells up from deep below. But, 
even if I don't, it helped me find the words to properly close this book. 


243 



I hope that my writing has proved useful to you. I hope it revealed things you knew that 
you did not know you knew. I hope the ancient wisdom I discussed provides you with 
strength. I hope it brightened the spark within you. I hope you can straighten up, sort out 
your family, and bring peace and prosperity to your community. I hope, in accordance 
with Rule 11 (Do not bother children when they are skateboarding), that you strengthen 
and encourage those who are committed to your care instead of protecting them to the 
point of weakness. 

I wish you all the best, and hope that you can wish the best for others. 

What will you write with your pen of light? 


244 



Endnotes 


1. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975). The Gulag Archipelago 1918-1956: An experiment in literary 
investigation (Vol. 2). (T.P. Whitney, Trans.). New York: Harper & Row, p. 626. 

2. If you want to do some serious thinking about lobsters, this is a good place to start: 
Corson, T. (2005). The secret life of lobsters: How fishermen and scientists are unraveling the 
mysteries of our favorite crustacean. New York: Harper Perennial. 

3. Schjelderup-Ebbe, & T. (1935). Social behavior of birds. Clark University Press. 
Retrieved from http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1935-19907-007 ; see also Price, J. S., 
& Sloman, L. (1987). "Depression as yielding behavior: An animal model based on 
Schjelderup-Ebbe's pecking order." Ethology and Sociobiology, 8, 85-98. 

4. Sapolsky, R. M. (2004). "Social status and health in humans and other 
animals. "Annual Review of Anthropology, 33, 393-418. 

5. Rutishauser, R. L., Basu, A. C., Cromarty, S. I., & Kravitz, E. A. (2004). "Long-term 
consequences of agonistic interactions between socially naive juvenile American 
lobsters (Homarus americanus)." The Biological Bulletin, 207, 183-7. 

6. Kravitz, E.A. (2000). "Serotonin and aggression: Insights gained from a lobster 
model system and speculations on the role of amine neurons in a complex 
behavior. ''Journal of Comparative Physiology, 186, 221-238. 

7. Huber, R., & Kravitz, E. A. (1995). "A quantitative analysis of agonistic behavior in 
juvenile American lobsters ( Homarus americanus L.)". Brain, Behavior and Evolution, 46, 
72-83. 

8. Yeh S-R, Fricke RA, Edwards DH (1996) "The effect of social experience on 
serotonergic modulation of the escape circuit of crayfish. ''Science, 271, 366-369. 

9. Huber, R., Smith, K., Delago, A., Isaksson, K., & Kravitz, E. A. (1997). "Serotonin 
and aggressive motivation in crustaceans: Altering the decision to retreat." Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 94, 5939-42. 

10. Antonsen, B. L., & Paul, D. H. (1997). "Serotonin and octopamine elicit stereotypical 
agonistic behaviors in the squat lobster Munida quadrispina ( Anomura, Galatheidae)." 
Journal of Comparative Physiology A: Sensory, Neural, and Behavioral Physiology, 181, 501- 
510. 

1_1. Credit Suisse (2015, Oct). Global Wealth Report 2015, p. 11. Retrieved from 
https://publications.credit-suisse.com/tasks/render/file/PfileID = F2425415-DCA7- 
80B8-EAD989AF9341D47E 

12. Fenner, T., Levene, M., & Loizou, G. (2010). "Predicting the long tail of book sales: 
Unearthing the power-law exponent." Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its 
Applications, 389, 2416-2421. 

13. de Solla Price, D. J. (1963). Little science, big science. New York: Columbia University 
Press. 

14. As theorized by Wolff, J.O. & Peterson, J.A. (1998). "An offspring-defense 
hypothesis for territoriality in female mammals." Ethology, Ecology & Evolution, 10, 
227-239; Generalized to crustaceans by Figler, M.H., Blank, G.S. & Peek, H.V.S 
(2001). "Maternal territoriality as an offspring defense strategy in red swamp crayfish 
(Procambarus clarkii, Girard)." Aggressive Behavior, 27, 391-403. 


245 





15 . Waal, F. B. M. de (2007). Chimpanzee politics: Power and sex among apes. Baltimore, 
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press; Waal, F. B. M. de (1996). Good natured: The 
origins of right and wrong in humans and other animals. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

16. Bracken-Grissom, H. D., Ahyong, S. T., Wilkinson, R. D., Feldmann, R. M., 
Schweitzer, C. E., Breinholt, J. W., Crandall, K. A. (2014). "The emergence of 
lobsters: Phylogenetic relationships, morphological evolution and divergence time 
comparisons of an ancient group." Systematic Biology, 63, 457-479. 

17. A brief summary: Ziomkiewicz-Wichary, A. (2016). "Serotonin and dominance." In 
T.K. Shackelford & V.A. Weekes-Shackelford (Eds.). Encyclopedia of evolutionary 
psychological science, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-16999-6_1440-l. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/310586509_Serotonin__and_Dominance 

18. Janicke, T., Haderer, I. K., Lajeunesse, M. J., & Anthes, N. (2016). "Darwinian sex 
roles confirmed across the animal kingdom." Science Advances, 2, el500983. Retrieved 
from http://advances.sciencemag.Org/content/2/2/el500983 

1_9. Steenland, K., Hu, S., & Walker, J. (2004). "All-cause and cause-specific mortality by 
socioeconomic status among employed persons in 27 US states, 1984-1997." 
American Journal of Public Health, 94, 1037-1042. 

20. Crockett, M. J., Clark, L., Tabibnia, G., Lieberman, M. D., & Robbins, T. W. (2008). 
"Serotonin modulates behavioral reactions to unfairness." Science, 320, 1739. 

21. McEwen, B. (2000). "Allostasis and allostatic load implications for 

neuropsychopharmacology." Neuropsychopharmacology, 22, 108-124. 

22. Salzer, H. M. (1966). "Relative hypoglycemia as a cause of neuropsychiatric illness." 
Journal of the National Medical Association, 58, 12-17. 

23. Peterson J.B., Pihl, R.O., Gianoulakis, C., Conrod, P., Finn, P.R., Stewart, S.H., 
LeMarquand, D.G. Bruce, K.R. (1996). "Ethanol-induced change in cardiac and 
endogenous opiate function and risk for alcoholism." Alcoholism: Clinical & 
Experimental Research, 20, 1542-1552. 

24. Pynoos, R. S., Steinberg, A. M., & Piacentini, J. C. (1999). "A developmental 
psychopathology model of childhood traumatic stress and intersection with anxiety 
disorders." Biological Psychiatry, 46, 1542-1554. 

25 . Olweus, D. (1993). Bullying at school: What we know and what we can do. New York: 
Wiley-Blackwell. 

26. Ibid. 

27. Janoff-Bulman, R. (1992). Shattered assumptions: Towards a new psychology of trauma. 
New York: The Free Press. 

28. Weisfeld, G. E., & Beresford, J. M. (1982). "Erectness of posture as an indicator of 
dominance or success in humans." Motivation and Emotion, 6, 113-131. 

29. Kleinke, C. L., Peterson, T. R., & Rutledge, T. R. (1998). "Effects of self-generated 
facial expressions on mood .''Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 272-279. 

30. Tamblyn, R., Tewodros, E., Huang, A., Winslade, N. & Doran, P. (2014). "The 
incidence and determinants of primary nonadherence with prescribed medication in 
primary care: a cohort study." Annals of Internal Medicine, 160, 441-450. 

31 . 1 outlined this in some detail in Peterson, J.B. (1999). Maps of meaning: The architecture 
of belief. New York: Routledge. 

32. Van Strien, J.W., Franken, I.H.A. & Huijding, J. (2014). "Testing the snake-detection 
hypothesis: Larger early posterior negativity in humans to pictures of snakes than to 
pictures of other reptiles, spiders and slugs." Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 691- 
697. For a more general discussion, see Ledoux, J. (1998). The emotional brain: The 
mysterious underpinnings of emotional life. New York: Simon & Schuster. 


246 




33. For the classic treatise on this issue see Gibson, J.J. (1986). An ecological approach to 
visual perception. New York: Psychology Press. See also Floel, A., Ellger, T., 
Breitenstein, C. & Knecht, S. (2003). "Language perception activates the hand motor 
cortex: implications for motor theories of speech perception." European Journal of 
Neuroscience, 18, 704-708, for a discussion of the relationship between speech and 
action. For a more general review of the relationship between action and perception, 
see Pulvermiiller, F., Moseley, R.L., Egorova, N., Shebani, Z. & Boulenger, V. (2014). 
"Motor cognition-motor semantics: Action perception theory of cognition and 
communication Neuropsychologia, 55, 71-84. 

Floel, A., Ellger, T., Breitenstein, C. & Knecht, S. (2003). "Language perception activates 
the hand motor cortex: Implications for motor theories of speech perception." 
European Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 704-708; Fadiga, L., Craighero, L. & Olivier, E 
(2005). "Human motor cortex excitability during the perception of others' action." 
Current Opinions in Neurobiology, 15, 213-218; Palmer, C.E., Bunday, K.L., Davare, M. 
& Kilner, J.M. (2016). "A causal role for primary motor cortex in perception of 
observed actions .''Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 28, 2021-2029. 

34. Barrett, J.L. (2004). Why would anyone believe in God? Lanham, MD: Altamira Press. 

35. For a decent review, see Barrett, J.L. & Johnson, A.H. (2003). "The role of control in 
attributing intentional agency to inanimate objects .''Journal of Cognition and Culture, 3, 
208-217. 

36. I would also most highly recommend, in this regard, this book by C.G. Jung's most 
outstanding student/colleague, Neumann, E. (1955). The Great Mother: An analysis of 
the archetype. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

37 . https://www.dol.gov/wb/stats/occ_gender_share_em_1020_txt.htm 

38. Muller, M.N., Kalhenberg, S.M., Thompson, M.E. & Wrangham, R.W. (2007). "Male 
coercion and the costs of promiscuous mating for female chimpanzees." Proceedings of 
the Royal Society (B), 274, 1009-1014. 

39. For a host of interesting statistics derived from the analysis of his dating site, 
OkCupid, see Rudder, C. (2015). Dataclysm: Love, sex, race & identity. New York: 
Broadway Books. It is also the case on such sites that a tiny minority of individuals 
get the vast majority of interested inquiries (another example of the Pareto 
distribution). 

40. Wilder, J.A., Mobasher, Z. & Hammer, M.F. (2004). "Genetic evidence for unequal 
effective population sizes of human females and males." Molecular Biology and 
Evolution, 21, 2047-2057. 

41 . Miller, G. (2001). The mating mind: How sexual choice shaped the evolution of human 
nature. New York: Anchor. 

42. Pettis, J. B. (2010). "Androgyny BT." In D. A. Leeming, K. Madden, & S. Marian 
(Eds.). Encyclopedia of psychology and religion (pp. 35-36). Boston, MA: Springer US. 

43. Goldberg, E. (2003). The executive brain: Frontal lobes and the civilized mind. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

44. For the classic works, see Campbell, D.T. & Fiske, D.W. (1959). "Convergent and 
discriminant validation by the multitrait-multimethod matrix." Psychological Bulletin, 
56, 81-105. A similar idea was developed in Wilson, E.O. (1998). Consilience: The unity 
of knowledge. New York: Knopf. It's also why we have five senses, so we can 
"pentangulate" our way through the world, with qualitatively separate modes of 
perception operating and cross-checking simultaneously. 

45. Headland, T. N., & Greene, H. W. (2011). "Hunter-gatherers and other primates as 
prey, predators, and competitors of snakes." Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA, 108, 1470-1474. 


247 



46 . Keeley, L. H. (1996). War before civilization: The myth of the peaceful savage. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

47. "Gradually it was disclosed to me that the line separating good and evil passes not 
through states, nor between classes, nor between political parties either-but right 
through every human heart-and through all human hearts. This line shifts. Inside 
us, it oscillates with the years. And even within hearts overwhelmed by evil, one 
small bridgehead of good is retained. And even in the best of all hearts, there remains 
... an unuprooted small corner of evil. Since then I have come to understand the 
truth of all the religions of the world: They struggle with the evil inside a human 
being (inside every human being). It is impossible to expel evil from the world in its 
entirety, but it is possible to constrict it within each person." Solzhenitsyn, A.I. 
(1975). The Gulag Archipelago 1918-1956: An experiment in literary investigation (Vol. 2). 
(T.P. Whitney, Trans.). New York: Harper & Row, p. 615. 

48. The best exploration of this I have ever encountered is to be found in the brilliant 
documentary about the underground cartoonist Robert Crumb, entitled Crumb, 
directed by Terry Zwigoff (1995), released by Sony Pictures Classic. This 
documentary will tell you more than you want to know about resentment, deceit, 
arrogance, hatred for mankind, sexual shame, the devouring mother and the 
tyrannical father. 

49 . Bill, V.T. (1986). Chekhov: The silent voice of freedom. Allied Books, Ltd. 

50. Costa, P.T., Teracciano, A. & McCrae, R.R. (2001). "Gender differences in 
personality traits across cultures: robust and surprising findings. ''Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 81, 322-331. 

51 . Isbell, L. (2011). The fruit, the tree and the serpent: Why we see so well. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press; see also Hayakawa, S., Kawai, N., Masataka, N., Luebker, 
A., Tomaiuolo, F., & Caramazza, A. (2011). "The influence of color on snake 
detection in visual search in human children." Scientific Reports, 1, 1-4. 

52. Virgin and Child (c. 1480) by Geertgen tot Sint Jans (c. 1465- c. 1495) provides an 
outstanding example of this, with Mary, the Christ Child and the serpent additionally 
superimposed on a background of medieval musical instruments (and the infant 
Christ playing the role of conductor). 

53. Osorio, D., Smith, A.C., Vorobyev, M. & Buchanan-Smieth, H.M. (2004). "Detection 
of fruit and the selection of primate visual pigments for color vision." The American 
Naturalist, 164, 696-708. 

54 . Macrae, N. (1992). John von Neumann : The scientific genius who pioneered the modern 
computer, game theory, nuclear deterrence, and much more. New York: Pantheon Books. 

55. Wittman, A. B., & Wall, L. L. (2007). "The evolutionary origins of obstructed labor: 
bipedalism, encephalization, and the human obstetric dilemma." Obstetrical & 
Gynecological Survey, 62, 739-748. 

56. Other explanations exist: Dunsworth, H. M., Warrener, A. G., Deacon, T., Ellison, P. 
T., & Pontzer, H. (2012). "Metabolic hypothesis for human altriciality." Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109, 15212-15216. 

57. Heidel, A. (1963). The Babylonian Genesis: The story of the creation. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press. 

58. Salisbury, J. E. (1997). Perpetua's passion: The death and memory of a young Roman 
woman. New York: Routledge. 

59 . Pinker, S. (2011). The better angels of our nature: Why violence has declined. New York: 
Viking Books. 

60. Nietzsche, F.W. & Kaufmann, W.A. (1982). The portable Nietzsche. New York: 
Penguin Classics (Maxims and Arrows 12). 


248 


61. Peterson, J.B. (1999). Maps of meaning: The architecture of belief. New York: Routledge, 
p. 264. 

62. Miller, G. (2016, November 3). Could pot help solve the U.S. opioid epidemic? 
Science. Retrieved from http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/ll/could-pot-help- 
solve-us-opioid-epidemic 

63. Barrick, M. R., Stewart, G. L., Neubert, M. J., and Mount, M. K. (1998). "Relating 
member ability and personality to work-team processes and team effectiveness." 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 377-391; for a similar effect with children, see 
Dishion, T. J., McCord, J., & Poulin, F. (1999). "When interventions harm: Peer 
groups and problem behavior." American Psychologist, 54, 755-764. 

64. McCord, J. & McCord, W. (1959). "A follow-up report on the Cambridge-Somerville 
youth study." Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 32, 89-96. 

65 . See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jQyvmT3ab80 (from Money BART: Episode 
3, Season 23 of The Simpsons). 

66. Rogers outlined six conditions for constructive personality change to occur. The 
second of these was the client's "state of incongruence," which is, roughly speaking, 
knowledge that something is wrong and has to change. See Rogers, C. R. (1957). 
"The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic personality chang e." Journal of 
Consulting Psychology, 21, 95-103. 

67. Poffenberger, A.T. (1930). "The development of men of science." Journal of Social 
Psychology, 1, 31-47. 

68. Taylor, S.E. & Brown, J. (1988). "Illusion and well-being: A social psychological 
perspective on mental health." Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193-210. 

69. The word sin is derived from the Greek dpapTavav (hamartanein), which means to 
miss the mark. Connotations: error of judgment; fatal flaw. See 

http ://biblehub. com/greek/264. htm 

70 . See Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin. 

71. Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). "Gorillas in our midst: Sustained 
inattentional blindness for dynamic events." Perception, 28, 1059-1074. 

72. http://www.dansimons.com/videos.html 

73. Azzopardi, P. & Cowey, A. (1993). "Preferential representation of the fovea in the 
primary visual cortex." Nature, 361, 719-721. 

74. see http://www.earlychristianwritings.com/thomas/gospelthomasl 13.html 

75. Nietzsche, F. (2003). Beyond good and evil. Fairfield, IN: 1st World Library/Literary 
Society, p. 67. 

76. http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/2l/nyregion/2lyitta.html 

77 . Balaresque, P., Poulet, N., Cussat-Blanc, S., Gerard, P., Quintana-Murci, L., Heyer, 
E., & Jobling, M. A. (2015). "Y-chromosome descent clusters and male differential 
reproductive success: young lineage expansions dominate Asian pastoral nomadic 
populations." European Journal of Human Genetics, 23, 1413-1422. 

78. Moore, L. T., McEvoy, B., Cape, E., Simms, K., & Bradley, D. G. (2006). "A Y- 
chromosome signature of hegemony in Gaelic Ireland." American Journal of Human 
Genetics, 78, 334-338. 

79. Zerjal, T., Xue, Y., Bertorelle, G., Wells et al. (2003). "The genetic legacy of the 
Mongols." American Journal of Human Genetics, 72, 717-21. 

80. Jones, E. (1953). The life and work of Sigmund Freud (Vol. I). New York: Basic Books, p. 
5. 

81. A decent brief summary of such ideas is provided here: 

https://www.britannica.com/art/noble-savage 


249 










82. Well reviewed in Roberts, B. W., & Mroczek, D. (2008). "Personality trait change in 
adulthood." Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 31-35. 

83. For a thorough, empirically-grounded and reliable discussion of such matters, see 
Olweus, D. (1993). Bullying at school: What we know and what we can do. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell Publishing. 

84 . Goodall, J. (1990). Through a window: My thirty years with the chimpanzees of Gombe. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. 

85. Finch, G. (1943). "The bodily strength of chimpanzees." Journal of Mammalogy, 24, 
224-228. 

86. Goodall, J. (1972). In the shadow of man. New York: Dell. 

87. Wilson, M.L. et al. (2014). "Lethal aggression in Pan is better explained by adaptive 
strategies than human impacts." Nature, 513, 414-417. 

88 . Goodall, J. (1990). Through a window: My thirty years with the chimpanzees of Gombe. 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, pp. 128-129. 

89. Chang, I. (1990). The rape of Nanking. New York: Basic Books. 

90. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2013). Global study on homicide. Retrieved 
from 

https://www.unodc.org/documents/gsh/pdfs/2014_GLOBAL_HOMICIDE_BOOK_w( 

91. Thomas, E.M. (1959). The harmless people. New York: Knopf. 

92. Roser, M. (2016). Ethnographic and archaeological evidence on violent deaths. Retrieved 
from https://ourworldindata.org/ethnographic-and-archaeological-evidence-on- 
violent-deaths/ 

93 . Ibid; also Brown, A. (2000). The Darwin wars: The scientific battle for the soul of man. 
New York: Pocket Books. 

94 . Keeley, L.H. (1997). War before civilization: The myth of the peaceful savage. Oxford 
University Press, USA. 

95. Carson, S.H., Peterson, J.B. & Higgins, D.M. (2005). "Reliability, validity and factor 
structure of the Creative Achievement Questionnaire." Creativity Research Journal, 17, 
37-50. 

96 . Stokes, P.D. (2005). Creativity from constraints: The psychology of breakthrough. New 
York: Springer. 

97. Wrangham, R. W., & Peterson, D. (1996). Demonic males: Apes and the origins of human 
violence. New York: Houghton Mifflin. 

98. Peterson, J.B. & Flanders, J. (2005). Play and the regulation of aggression. In 
Tremblay, R.E., Hartup, W.H. & Archer, J. (Eds.). Developmental origins of aggression. 
(pp. 133-157). New York: Guilford Press; Nagin, D., & Tremblay, R. E. (1999). 
"Trajectories of boys' physical aggression, opposition, and hyperactivity on the path 
to physically violent and non-violent juvenile delinquency." Child Development, 70, 
1181-1196. 

99. Sullivan, M.W. (2003). "Emotional expression of young infants and children." Infants 
and Young Children, 16, 120-142. 

100. See BF Skinner Foundation: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vGazyH6fQQ4 

101. Glines, C.B. (2005). "Top secret World War II bat and bird bomber program." 
Aviation History, 15, 38-44. 

102. Flasher, J. (1978). "Adultism." Adolescence, 13, 517-523; Fletcher, A. (2013). Ending 
discrimination against young people. Olympia, WA: CommonAction Publishing. 

103 . de Waal, F. (1998). Chimpanzee politics: Power and sex among apes. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press. 

104 . Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal emotions. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 


250 






105. Tremblay, R. E., Nagin, D. S., Seguin, J. R., Zoccolillo, M., Zelazo, P. D., Boivin, M., 
... Japel, C. (2004). "Physical aggression during early childhood: trajectories and 
predictors." Pediatrics, 114, 43-50. 

106. Krein, S. F., & Beller, A. H. (1988). "Educational attainment of children from single- 

parent families: Differences by exposure, gender, and race." Demography, 25, 221; 
McLoyd, V. C. (1998). "Socioeconomic disadvantage and child development." The 
American Psychologist, 53, 185-204; Lin, Y.-C., & Seo, D.-C. (2017). "Cumulative 
family risks across income levels predict deterioration of children's general health 
during childhood and adolescence." PLOS ONE, 12(5), e0177531. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0177531 ; Amato, P. R., & Keith, B. (1991). 
"Parental divorce and the well-being of children: A meta-analysis." Psychological 
Bulletin, 110, 26-46. 

107. Eric Harris's diary: http://melikamp.com/features/eric.shtml 

108 . Goethe, J.W. (1979). Faust, part one (P. Wayne, Trans.). London: Penguin Books, p. 
75. 

109 . Goethe, J.W. (1979). Faust, part two (P. Wayne, Trans.). London: Penguin Books, p. 
270. 

110 . Tolstoy, L. (1887-1983). Confessions (D. Patterson, Trans.). New York: W.W. Norton, 
pp. 57-58. 

111 . The Guardian (2016, June 14). 1000 mass shootings in 1260 days: this is what America's 
gun crisis looks like. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng- 
interactive/2015/oct/02/mass-shootings-am erica-gun-violence 

112. The words of Eric Harris: 

https://schoolshooters.info/sites/default/files/harris_journal_l-3.pdf 

113. Cited in Kaufmann, W. (1975). Existentialism from Dostoevsky to Sartre. New York: 
Meridian, pp. 130-131. 

114 . See Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975). The Gulag Archipelago 1918-1956: An experiment in 
literary investigation (Vol. 2). (T.P. Whitney, Trans.). New York: Harper & Row. 

115 . Piaget, J. (1932). The moral judgement of the child. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, 
Trubner and Company; see also Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams and imitation in 
childhood. New York: W.W. Norton and Company. 

116 . Franklin, B. (1916). Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin. Rahway, New Jersey: The 
Quinn & Boden Company Press. Retrieved from 
https://www.gutenberg.org/files/20203/20203-h/202Q3-h.htm 

117 . See Xenophon's Apology of Socrates, section 23, retrieved at 
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text? 

doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0212%3Atext%3DApol.%3Asection%3D23 

118. Ibid., section 2. 

119 . Ibid., section 3. 

120 . Ibid,, section 8. 

121. Ibid., section 4. 

122. Ibid., section 12. 

123. Ibid., section 13. 

124. Ibid., section 14. 

125. Ibid., section 7. 

126. Ibid. 

127. Ibid., section 8. 

128 '. Ibid. 

129 . Ibid., section 33. 

130. Goethe, J.W. (1979b). Faust, part two (P. Wayne, Trans.). London: Penguin Books, p. 
270. 


251 











131. There are very useful commentaries on every Biblical verse at 

http://biblehub.com/commentaries/ and specifically on this verse at 

http://biblehub.com/commentaries/genesis/4-7.htm 

132. "For whence/ But from the author of all ill could spring/ So deep a malice, to 

confound the race/ Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell/ To mingle and 
involve, done all to spite /The great Creator?" Milton, J. (1667). Paradise Lost, Book 2, 
381-385. Retrieved from 

https://www.dartmouth.edu/~milton/reading_room/pl/book_2/text.shtml 

133 . Jung, C.G. (1969). Aion: Researches into the phenomenology of the self (Vol. 9: Part II, 
Collected Works of C. G. Jung): Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, (chapter 
5). 

134 . http://www.acolumbinesite.com/dylan/writing.php 

135. Schapiro, J.A., Glynn, S.M., Foy, D.W. & Yavorsky, M.A. (2002). "Participation in 
war-zone atrocities and trait dissociation among Vietnam veterans with combat- 
related PTSD." Journal of Trauma and Dissociation, 3, 107-114; Yehuda, R., Southwick, 
S.M. & Giller, E.L. (1992). "Exposure to atrocities and severity of chronic PTSD in 
Vietnam combat veterans." American Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 333-336. 

136 . See Harpur, T. (2004). The pagan Christ: recovering the lost light. Thomas Allen 
Publishers. There is also a discussion of this in Peterson, J.B. (1999). Maps of meaning: 
The architecture of belief New York: Routledge. 

137 . Lao-Tse (1984). The tao te ching. (1984) (S. Rosenthal, Trans.). Verse 64: Staying 

with the mystery. Retrieved from 

https://terebess.hU/english/tao/rosenthal.html#Kap64. 

138 . Jung, C.G. (1969). Aion: Researches into the phenomenology of the self (Vol. 9: Part II, 
Collected Works of C. G. Jung): Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 

139 . Dobbs, B.J.T. (2008). The foundations of Newton's alchemy. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 

140. Ephesians 2:8-2:9 reads, for example (in the King James Version): For by grace are 
ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: Not of works, 
lest any man should boast. A similar sentiment is echoed in Romans 9:15-9:16:1 will 
have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will 
have compassion. So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but 
of God that sheweth mercy. The New International Version restates 9:16 this way: It 
does not, therefore, depend on human desire or effort, but on God's mercy. 

141. Nietzsche, F.W. & Kaufmann, W.A. (1982). The portable Nietzsche. New York: 
Penguin Classics. Contains, among others, Nietzsche's Twilight of the idols and the anti- 
Christ: or how to philosophize with a hammer. 

142. Nietzsche, F. (1974). The gay science (Kaufmann, W., Trans.). New York: Vintage, pp. 
181-182. 

143 . Nietzsche, F. (1968). The will to power (Kaufmann, W., Trans.). New York: Vintage, 
p. 343. 

144 . Dostoevsky, F.M. (2009). The grand inquisitor. Merchant Books. 

145. Nietzsche, F. (1954). Beyond good and evil (Zimmern, H., Trans.). In W.H. Wright 
(Ed.), The Philosophy of Nietzsche (pp. 369-616). New York: Modern Library, p. 477. 

146. "Let our conjectures, our theories, die in our stead! We may still learn to kill our 
theories instead of killing each other .... [It] is perhaps more than a utopian dream 
that one day may see the victory of the attitude (it is the rational or the scientific 
attitude) of eliminating our theories, our opinions, by rational criticism, instead of 
eliminating each other." From Popper, K. (1977). "Natural selection and the 
emergence of mind." Lecture delivered at Darwin College, Cambridge, UK. See 
http://www.informationphilosopher.com/solutions/philosophers/popper/natural_sel 


252 








147 . This is detailed in the introduction to Peterson, J.B. (1999). Maps of meaning: the 
architecture of belief. New York: Routledge. 

148. Adler, A. (1973). "Life-lie and responsibility in neurosis and psychosis: a 
contribution to melancholia." In P. Radin (Trans.). The practice and theory of Individual 
Psychology. Totawa, N.J.: Littlefield, Adams & Company. 

149. Milton, J. (1667). Paradise Lost. Book 1: 40-48. Retrieved from 

https://www.dartmouth.edu/~milton/reading_room/pl/book_l/text.shtml 

150. Milton, J. (1667). Paradise Lost. Book 1: 249-253. Retrieved from 

https://www.dartmouth.edu/~milton/reading_room/pl/book_l/text.shtml 

151. Milton, J. (1667). Paradise Lost. Book 1: 254-255. Retrieved from 

https://www.dartmouth.edu/~milton/reading_room/pl/book_l/text.shtml 

152. Milton, J. (1667). Paradise Lost. Book 1: 261-263.Retrieved from 

https://www.dartmouth.edu/~milton/reading_room/pl/book_l/text.shtml 

153 . This is detailed in to Peterson, J.B. (1999). Maps of meaning: The architecture of belief. 
New York: Routledge. 

154. Hitler, A. (1925/2017). Mein kampf (M. Roberto, Trans.). Independently Published, 
pp. 172-173. 

155. Finkelhor, D., Hotaling, G., Lewis, I.A. & Smith, C. (1990). "Sexual abuse in a 
national survey of adult men and women: prevalence, characteristics, and risk 
factors." Child Abuse & Neglect, 14, 19-28. 

156. Rind, B., Tromovitch, P. & Bauserman, R. (1998). "A meta-analytic examination of 
assumed properties of child sexual abuse using college samples." Psychological Bulletin, 
124, 22-53. 

157 . Loftus, E.F. (1997). "Creating false memories." Scientific American, 277, 70-75. 

158. Taken from Rogers, C. R. (1952). "Communication: its blocking and its facilitation." 
ETC: A Review of General Semantics, 9, 83-88. 

159 . See Gibson, J.J. (1986). An ecological approach to visual perception, New York: 
Psychology Press, for the classic treatise on this issue. See also Floel, A., Ellger, T., 
Breitenstein, C. & Knecht, S. (2003). "Language perception activates the hand motor 
cortex: implications for motor theories of speech perception." European Journal of 
Neuroscience, 18, 704-708 for a discussion of the relationship between speech and 
action. For a more general review of the relationship between action and perception, 
see Pulvermiiller, F., Moseley, R.L., Egorova, N., Shebani, Z. & Boulenger, V. (2014). 
"Motor cognition-motor semantics: Action perception theory of cognition and 
communication." Neuropsychologia, 55, 71-84. 

160 . Cardinali, L., Frassinetti, F., Brozzoli, C., Urquizar, C., Roy, A.C. & Fame, A. (2009). 
"Tool-use induces morphological updating of the body schema." Current Biology, 12, 
478-479. 

161 . Bernhardt, P.C., Dabbs, J.M. Jr., Fielden, J.A. & Lutter, C.D. (1998). "Testosterone 
changes during vicarious experiences of winning and losing among fans at sporting 
events." Physiology & Behavior, 65, 59-62. 

162 . Some, but not all of this, is detailed in Gray, J. & McNaughton, N. (2003). The 
neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry into the functions of the septal-hippocampal system. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. See also Peterson, J.B. (2013). "Three forms of 
meaning and the management of complexity." In T. Proulx, K.D. Markman & M.J. 
Lindberg (Eds.). The psychology of meaning (pp. 17-48). Washington, D.C.: American 
Psychological Association; Peterson, J.B. & Flanders, J.L. (2002). "Complexity 
management theory: Motivation for ideological rigidity and social conflict." Cortex, 
38, 429-458. 

163 . Yeats, W.B. (1933) The Second Coming. In R.J. Finneran (Ed.). The poems of W.B. 
Yeats: A new edition. New York: MacMillan, p. 158. 


253 







164. As reviewed in Vrolix, K. (2006). "Behavioral adaptation, risk compensation, risk 

homeostasis and moral hazard in traffic safety." Steunpunt Verkeersveiligheid, RA-2006- 
95. Retrieved from 

https://doclib.uhasselt.be/dspace/bitstream/1942/4002/l/behavioraladaptation.pdf 

165. Nietzsche, F.W. & Kaufmann, W.A. (1982). The portable Nietzsche. New York: 
Penguin Classics, pp. 211-212. 

166 . Orwell, G. (1958). The road to Wigan Pier. New York: Harcourt, pp. 96-97. 

167 . Carson, R. (1962). Silent spring. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 

168. see http://reason.com/archives/2016/12/13/the-most-important-graph-in-the-world 

169 . http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/earth/earthnews/9815862/Humans-are-plague- 
on-Earth-Attenborough.html 

170. "The Earth has cancer, and the cancer is man." Mesarovic, M.D. & Pestel, E. (1974). 
Mankind at the turning point. New York: Dutton, p. 1. The idea was first proposed (and 
the quote taken from) Gregg, A. (1955). "A medical aspect of the population 
problem." Science, 121, 681-682, p. 681 and further developed by Hern, W.M. (1993). 
"Has the human species become a cancer on the planet? A theoretical view of 
population growth as a sign of pathology." Current World Leaders, 36, 1089-1124. 
From the Club of Rome's King, A. & Schneider, B. (1991). The first global revolution. 
New York: Pantheon Books, p. 75: "The common enemy of humanity is man. In 
searching for a new enemy to unite us, we came up with the idea that pollution, the 
threat of global warming, water shortages, famine and the like would fit the bill. All 
these dangers are caused by human intervention, and it is only through changed 
attitudes and behavior that they can be overcome. The real enemy then, is humanity 
itself." 

171. Costa, P. T., Terracciano, A., & McCrae, R. R. (2001). "Gender differences in 
personality traits across cultures: robust and surprising findings." Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 81, 322-31; Weisberg, Y. J., DeYoung, C. G., & Hirsh, J. B. 
(2011). "Gender differences in personality across the ten aspects of the Big Five." 
Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 178; Schmitt, D. P., Realo, A., Voracek, M., & Allik, J. 
(2008). "Why can't a man be more like a woman? Sex differences in Big Five 
personality traits across 55 cultures." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 
168-182. 

172. De Bolle, M., De Fruyt, F., McCrae, R. R., et al. (2015). "The emergence of sex 
differences in personality traits in early adolescence: A cross-sectional, cross-cultural 
study .''Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 108, 171-85. 

173 . Su, R., Rounds, J., & Armstrong, P. I. (2009). "Men and things, women and people: 
A meta-analysis of sex differences in interests." Psychological Bulletin, 135, 859-884. 
For a neuro-developmental view of such differences, see Beltz, A. M., Swanson, J. L., 
& Berenbaum, S. A. (2011). "Gendered occupational interests: prenatal androgen 
effects on psychological orientation to things versus people." Hormones and Behavior, 
60, 313-7. 

174. Bihagen, E. & Katz-Gerro, T. (2000). "Culture consumption in Sweden: the stability 
of gender differences." Poetics, 27, 327-3409; Costa, P., Terracciano, A. & McCrae, 
R.R. (2001). "Gender differences in personality traits across cultures: robust and 
surprising findings." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 8, 322-331; Schmitt, 
D., Realo. A., Voracek, M. & Alii, J. (2008). "Why can't a man be more like a 
woman? Sex differences in Big Five personality traits across 55 cultures." Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 168-182; Lippa, R.A. (2010). "Sex differences in 
personality traits and gender-related occupational preferences across 53 nations: 
Testing evolutionary and social-environmental theories." Archives of Sexual Behavior, 
39, 619-636. 


254 







175 . Gatto, J. N. (2000). The underground history of American education: A school teacher's 
intimate investigation of the problem of modern schooling. New York: Odysseus Group. 

176 . See Why are the majority of university students women? Statistics Canada: Retrieved from 
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/81-004-x/2008001/article/10561-eng.htm 

177. See, for example, Hango. D. (2015). "Gender differences in science, technology, 

engineering, mathematics and computer science (STEM) programs at university." 
Statistics Canada, 75-006-X: Retrieved from 

http://www.statcan.gc.ca/access_acces/alternative_alternatif.action? 

l = eng&loc=/pub/75-006-x/2013001/article/11874-eng.pdf 

178. I'm not alone in this feeling. See, for example, Hymowitz, K.S. (2012). Manning up: 
How the rise of women has turned men into boys. New York: Basic Books. 

179 . see http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2012/04/26/young-men-and-women- 
differ-on-the-importance-of-a-successful-marriage/ 

180 . see http://www.pewresearch.org/data-trend/society-and-demographics/marriage/ 

181. This has been discussed extensively in the mainstream press: see 
https://www.thestar.com/life/2011/02/25/women_lawyers_leaving_in_droves.html ; 
http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/women-criminal-law-l.3476637 ; 

http://www.huffingtonpost. ca/andr ea-leku shoff/female-lawyers- 
canada_b_5000415.html 

182 . Jaffe, A., Chediak, G., Douglas, E., Tudor, M., Gordon, R.W., Ricca, L. & Robinson, 
S. (2016) "Retaining and advancing women in national law firms." Stanford Law and 
Policy Lab, White Paper: Retrieved from https://www-cdn.law.stanford.edu/wp- 
content/uploads/2016/05/W omen-in-Law-White-Paper-FINAL-May-31 -2016.pdf 

183. Conroy-Beam, D., Buss, D. M., Pham, M. N., & Shackelford, T. K. (2015). "How 
sexually dimorphic are human mate preferences?" Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 41, 1082-1093. For a discussion of how female mate preference changes as a 
consequence of purely biological (ovulatory) factors, see Gildersleeve, K., Haselton, 
M. G., & Fales, M. R. (2014). "Do women's mate preferences change across the 
ovulatory cycle? A meta-analytic review." Psychological Bulletin, 140, 1205-1259. 

184 . see Greenwood, J., Nezih, G., Kocharov, G & Santos, C. (2014)." Marry your like: 
Assortative mating and income inequality." IZA discussion paper No. 7895. Retrieved 
from http://hdl.handle.net/! 0419/93282 

185. A good review of such dismal matters can be found in Suh, G.W., Fabricious, W.V., 
Parke, R.D., Cookston, J.T., Braver, S.F. & Saenz, D.S. "Effects of the interparental 
relationship on adolescents' emotional security and adjustment: The important role 
of fathers." Developmental Psychology, 52, 1666-1678. 

186 . Hicks, S. R. C. (2011). Explaining postmodernism: Skepticism and socialism from Rousseau 
to Foucault. Santa Barbara, CA: Ockham' Razor Multimedia Publishing. The pdf is 
available at http://www. stephenhicks. org/wp-content/uploads/2009/10/hicks-ep- 
full.pdf 

187. Higgins, D.M., Peterson, J.B. & Pihl, R.O. "Prefrontal cognitive ability, intelligence, 
Big Five personality, and the prediction of advanced academic and workplace 
performance." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 298-319. 

188 . Carson, S.H., Peterson, J.B. & Higgins, D.M. (2005). "Reliability, validity and factor 
structure of the Creative Achievement Questionnaire." Creativity Research Journal, 17, 
37-50. 

189. Bouchard, T.J. & McGue, M. (1981). "Familial studies of intelligence: a review." 
Science, 212, 1055-1059; Brody, N. (1992). Intelligence. New York: Gulf Professional 
Publishing; Plomin R. & Petrill S.A. (1997). "Genetics and intelligence. What's 
new?" Intelligence, 24, 41-65. 


255 

















190 . Schiff, M., Duyme, M., Dumaret, A., Stewart, J., Tomkiewicz, S. & Feingold, J. 
(1978). "Intellectual status of working-class children adopted early into upper- 
middle-class families." Science, 200, 1503-1504; Capron, C. & Duyme, M. (1989). 
"Assessment of effects of socio-economic status on IQin a full cross-fostering study." 
Nature, 340, 552-554. 

191. Kendler, K.S., Turkheimer, E., Ohlsson, H., Sundquist, J. & Sundquist, K. (2015). 
"Family environment and the malleability of cognitive ability: a Swedish national 
home-reared and adopted-away cosibling control study." Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science USA, 112, 4612-4617. 

192 . For the OECD's take on this, see Closing the gender gap: Sweden, which starts by 
reviewing stats indicating that girls have an edge over boys with regards to education 
and that women are massively over-represented in health care and then proceeds to 
decry the still extant advantage of men in computer science. Retrieved from 

https://www.oecd.org/sweden/Closing%20the%20Gender%20Gap%20- 

%20Sweden%20FINAF.pdf 

193. Eron, L. D. (1980). "Prescription for reduction of aggression." The American 
Psychologist, 35, 244-252 (p. 251). 

194. Reviewed in Peterson, J.B. & Shane, M. (2004). "The functional neuroanatomy and 
psychopharmacology of predatory and defensive aggression." In J. McCord (Ed.). 
Beyond empiricism: Institutions and intentions in the study of crime. (Advances in 
Criminological Theory, Vol. 13) (pp. 107-146). Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Books; 
see also Peterson, J.B. & Flanders, J. (2005). "Play and the regulation of aggression." 
In Tremblay, R.E., Hartup, W.H. & Archer, J. (Eds.). Developmental origins of aggression. 
(Chapter 12; pp. 133-157). New York: Guilford Press. 

195. As reviewed in Tremblay, R. E., Nagin, D. S., Seguin, J. R., et al. (2004). "Physical 
aggression during early childhood: trajectories and predictors." Pediatrics, 114, 43-50. 

196. Heimberg, R. G., Montgomery, D., Madsen, C. H., & Heimberg, J. S. (1977). 
"Assertion training: A review of the literature." Behavior Therapy, 8, 953-971; 
Boisvert, J.-M., Beaudry, M., & Bittar, J. (1985). "Assertiveness training and human 
communication processes." Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 15, 58-73. 

197. Trull, T. J., & Widiger, T. A. (2013). "Dimensional models of personality: The five- 
factor model and the DSM-5." Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 15, 135-46; Vickers, 
K.E., Peterson, J.B., Hornig, C.D., Pihl, R.O., Seguin, J. & Tremblay, R.E. (1996). 
"Fighting as a function of personality and neuropsychological measures." Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences. 794, 411-412. 

198 . Bachofen, J.J. (1861). Das Mutterrecht: Eine untersuchung iiber die gynaikokratie der alten 
welt nach ihrer religiosen und rechtlichen natur. Stuttgart: Verlag von Krais und 
Hoffmann. 

199 . Gimbutas, M. (1991). The civilization of the goddess. San Francisco: Harper. 

200. Stone, M. (1978). When Cod was a woman. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 

201 . Eller, C. (2000). The myth of matriarchal prehistory: Why an invented past won't give 
women a future. Beacon Press. 

202 . Neumann, E. (1954). The origins and history of consciousness. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

203. Neumann, E. (1955). The Great Mother: An analysis of the archetype. New York: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 

204. See, for example, Adler, A. (2002). Theoretical part I-III: The accentuated fiction as 
guiding idea in the neurosis. In H.T. Stein (Ed.). The collected works of Alfred Adler 
volume 1: The neurotic character: Fundamentals of individual psychology and psychotherary 
(pp. 41-85). Bellingham, WA: Alfred Adler Institute of Northern Washington, p. 71. 


256 




205 . Moffitt, T.E., Caspi,A., Rutter, M. & Silva, P.A. (2001). Sex differences in antisocial 
behavior: Conduct disorder, delinquency, and violence in the Dunedin Longitudinal Study. 
London: Cambridge University Press. 

206. Buunk, B.P., Dijkstra, P., Fetchenhauer, D. & Kenrick, D.T. (2002). "Age and gender 
differences in mate selection criteria for various involvement levels." Personal 
Relationships, 9, 271-278. 

207. Lorenz, K. (1943). "Die angeborenen Formen moeglicher Erfahrung." Ethology, 5, 
235-409. 

208. Tajfel, H. (1970). "Experiments in intergroup discrimination." Nature, 223, 96-102. 

209. Taken from Dostoevsky, F. (1995). The brothers Karamazov (dramatized by David 
Fishelson). Dramatists Play Service, Inc., pp. 54-55. Retrieved from 

http://bit.ly/2ifSkMn 

210. And it's not the ability to microwave a burrito so hot that even He Himself could not 
eat it (as Homer asks, in Weekend at Burnsie's (episode 16, season 13, The Simpsons). 

211 . Lao-Tse (1984). The tao te ching. (1984) (S. Rosenthal, Trans.). Verse 11: The Utility 

of Non-Existence. Retrieved from 

https://terebess.hU/english/tao/rosenthal.html#Kapll 

212 . Dostoevsky, F. (1994). Notes from underground/White nights/The dream of a ridiculous 
man/The house of the dead (A.R. MacAndrew, Trans.). New York: New American 
Library, p. 114. 

213 . Goethe, J.W. (1979). Faust, part two (P. Wayne, Trans.). London: Penguin Books, p. 
270. 

214. Dikotter, F. Mao's great famine. London: Bloomsbury. 

215. See Peterson, J.B. (2006). Peacemaking among higher-order primates. In Fitzduff, M. 
& Stout, C.E. (Eds.). The psychology of resolving global conflicts: From war to peace. In 
Volume III, Interventions (pp. 33-40). New York: Praeger. Retrieved from 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/235336060_Peacemaking_among_higher- 

order_primates 

216. See Allen, L. (2011). Trust versus mistrust (Erikson's infant stages). In S. Goldstein 
& J. A. Naglieri (Eds.). Encyclopedia of child behavior and development (pp. 1509-1510). 
Boston, MA: Springer US. 

217 . Lao-Tse (1984). The tao te ching. (1984) (S. Rosenthal, Trans.). Verse 33: Without 

force: without perishing. Retrieved from 

https://terebess.hU/english/tao/rosenthal.html#Kap33 

218. Consider, for example, the great and courageous Boyan Slaat. This young Dutch 
man, still in his early twenties, has developed a technology that could do exactly that, 
and profitably, and be employed in all the oceans of the world. There's a real 
environmentalist: See https://www.theoceancleanup.com/ 

219. Yeats, W.B. (1933). Sailing to Byzantium. In R.J. Finneran (Ed.). The poems ofW.B. 
Yeats: A new edition. New York: MacMillan, p. 163. 


257 









Acknowledgements 


I lived through a tumultuous time when I was writing this book, to say the least. I had 
more than my fair share of reliable, competent, trustworthy people standing with me, 
however, and thank God for that. I would particularly like to thank my wife, Tammy, my 
great and good friend for almost fifty years. She has been an absolute pillar of honesty, 
stability, support, practical help, organization and patience during the years of writing 
that continued during anything and everything else that has happened in our lives, no 
matter how pressing or important. My daughter, Mikhaila, and my son, Julian, as well as 
my parents, Walter and Beverley, were also right there beside me, paying careful 
attention, discussing complicated issues with me, and aiding me in the organization of my 
thoughts, words and actions. The same is true of my brother-in-law, Jim Keller, computer 
chip architect extraordinaire, and my always reliable and adventurous sister, Bonnie. The 
friendship of Wodek Szemberg and Estera Bekier has proved invaluable to me, in many 
ways, for many years, as has the behind-the-scenes and subtle support of Professor 
William Cunningham. Dr. Norman Doidge went beyond the call of duty writing and 
revising the foreword to this book, which took far more effort than I had originally 
estimated, and the friendship and warmth he and his wife, Karen, continually provide has 
been very much appreciated by my entire family. It was a pleasure to collaborate with 
Craig Pyette, my editor at Random House Canada. Craig's careful attention to detail and 
ability to diplomatically rein in excess bursts of passion (and sometimes irritation) in my 
many drafts made for a much more measured and balanced book. 

Gregg Hurwitz, novelist, screen-writer and friend, used many of my rules for life in his 
bestseller Orphan X, well before my book was written, which was a great compliment and 
indicator of their potential value and public appeal. Gregg also volunteered as a dedicated, 
thorough, viciously incisive and comically cynical editor and commentator while I was 
writing and editing. He helped me cut unnecessary verbiage (some of it at least) and stay 
on the narrative track. Gregg also recommended Ethan van Scriver, who provided the fine 
illustrations that begin each chapter, and I would like to acknowledge him for that, as 
well as tipping my hat to Ethan himself, whose drawings add a necessary touch of 
lightness, whimsy and warmth to what might otherwise have been a too-dark and 
dramatic tome. 

Finally, I would like to thank Sally Harding, my agent, and the fine people she works 
with at CookeMcDermid. Without Sally, this book would have never been written. 


THE BEGINNING 


Some argue-mistakenly-that Freud (often mentioned in these pages) contributed to our current 
longing for a culture, schools and institutions that are "non-judgmental." It is true that he recommended 
that when psychoanalysts listen to their patients in therapy, they be tolerant, empathic, and not voice 
critical, moralistic judgments. But this was for the express purposes of helping patients feel comfortable in 
being totally honest, and not diminish their problems. This encouraged self-reflection, and allowed them 
to explore warded off feelings, wishes, even shameful anti-social urges. It also-and this was the 
masterstroke-allowed them to discover their own unconscious conscience (and its judgments), and their 
own harsh self-criticism of their "lapses," and their own unconscious guilt which they had often hidden 
from themselves, but which often formed the basis of their low self-esteem, depression and anxiety. If 
anything, Freud showed that we are both more immoral and more moral than we are aware of. This kind 
of "non-judgmentalism," in therapy, is a powerful and liberating technique or tactic-an ideal attitude 
when you want to better understand yourself. But Freud never argued (as do some who want all culture to 
become one huge group therapy session) that one can live one's entire life without ever making judgments, 
or without morality. In fact, his point in Civilization and its Discontents is that civilization only arises when 
some restraining rules and morality are in place. 

The yin/yang symbol is the second part of the more comprehensive five-part tajitu, a diagram 
representing both the original absolute unity and its division into the multiplicity of the observed world. 
This is discussed in more detail in Rule 2, below, as well as elsewhere in the book. 

I use the term Being (with a capital "B") in part because of my exposure to the ideas of the 20th- 
century German philosopher Martin Heidegger. Heidegger tried to distinguish between reality, as 
conceived objectively, and the totality of human experience (which is his "Being"). Being (with a capital 
"B") is what each of us experiences, subjectively, personally and individually, as well as what we each 
experience jointly with others. As such, it includes emotions, drives, dreams, visions and revelations, as 
well as our private thoughts and perceptions. Being is also, finally, something that is brought into 
existence by action, so its nature is to an indeterminate degree a consequence of our decisions and choices 
-something shaped by our hypothetically free will. Construed in this manner, Being is (1) not something 
easily and directly reducible to the material and objective and (2) something that most definitely requires 
its own term, as Heidegger labored for decades to indicate. 


RULE 2: TREAT YOURSELF LIKE SOMEONE YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR HELPING 


It is of great interest, in this regard, that the five-part taijitu (referred to in Chapter 1 and the source 
of the simpler yin/yang symbol) expresses the origin of the cosmos as, first, originating in the 
undifferentiated absolute, then dividing into yin and yang (chaos/order, feminine/masculine), and then 
into the five agents (wood, fire, earth, metal, water) and then, simply put, "the ten thousand things." The 
Star of David (chaos/order, feminine/masculine) gives rise in the same way to the four basic elements: 
fire, air, water and earth (out of which everything else is built). A similar hexagram is used by the Hindus. 
The downward triangle symbolizes Shakti, the feminine; the upward triangle, Shiva, the masculine. The 
two components are known as om and hrim in Sanskrit. Remarkable examples of conceptual parallelism. 

11 Or, in another interpretation, He split the original androgynous individual into two parts, male and 
female. According to this line of thinking, Christ, the "second Adam," is also the original Man, before the 
sexual subdivision. The symbolic meaning of this should be clear to those who have followed the 
argument thus far. 


RULE 5: DO NOT LET YOUR CHILDREN DO ANYTHING THAT MAKES YOU DISLIKE THEM 


I draw here and will many times again in the course of this book on my clinical experience (as I 
have, already, on my personal history). I have tried to keep the moral of the stories intact, while disguising 
the details for the sake of the privacy of those involved. I hope I got the balance right. 








RULE 7: PURSUE WHAT IS MEANINGFUL (NOT WHAT IS EXPEDIENT) 

And this is all true, note, whether there is-or is not -actually such a powerful figure, "in the sky" :) 

In keeping with this observation is the fact that the word Set is an etymological precursor to the 
word Satan. See Murdock, D.M. (2009). Christ in Egypt: the Horus-Jesus connection. Seattle, WA: Stellar 
House, p. 75. 

For anyone who thinks this is somehow unrealistic, given the concrete material reality and genuine 
suffering that is associated with privation, I would once again recommend Solzhenitsyn's Gulag 
Archipelago, which contains a series of exceptionally profound discussions about proper ethical behavior 
and its exaggerated rather than diminished importance in situations of extreme want and suffering. 


RULE 9: ASSUME THAT THE PERSON YOU ARE LISTENING TO MIGHT KNOW SOMETHING YOU DON'T 


" ! ' Here, again, I have disguised many of the details of this case, to maintain the privacy of those 
involved, while attempting to maintain the central meaning of the events. 

The strategy of speaking to individuals is not only vital to the delivery of any message, it's a useful 
antidote to fear of public speaking. No one wants to be stared at by hundreds of unfriendly, judgmental 
eyes. However, almost everybody can talk to just one attentive person. So, if you have to deliver a speech 
(another terrible phrase) then do that. Talk to the individuals in the audience-and don't hide: not behind 
the podium, not with downcast eyes, not by speaking too quietly or mumbling, not by apologizing for your 
lack of brilliance or preparedness, not behind ideas that are not yours, and not behind cliches. 


RULE 10: BE PRECISE IN YOUR SPEECH 


This is why, for example, it has taken us far longer than we originally assumed to make robots that 
could function autonomously in the world. The problem of perception is far more difficult than our 
immediate effortless access to our own perceptions predisposes us to infer. In fact, the problem of 
perception is so difficult that it stalled the early progress of artificial intelligence almost fatally (from the 
perspective of that time), as we discovered that disembodied abstract reason could not solve even simple 
real-world problems. Pioneers such as Rodney Brooks proposed in the late 1980s and early '90s that 
bodies in action were necessary preconditions to the parsing of the world into manageable things, and the 
AI revolution regained its confidence and momentum. 

The recording is available at Peterson, J.B. (2002). Slaying the Dragon Within Us. Lecture, originally 
broadcast by TVO: available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=REjUkEjlO 0 


RULE 11: DO NOT BOTHER CHILDREN WHEN THEY ARE SKATEBOARDING

The complexity of the world
Most psychological models, even those as sophisticated as Gray's (1982), are based on the assumption that the world is made of objects, existing independently and given, or, more abstractly, of stimuli. That assumption is wrong: the boundaries between objects or stimuli are situation-dependent and subjectively-determined. Half our brain is devoted to vision. This indicates that we do not simply see what is there. The "frame problem" encountered by AI engineers producing sensory systems for machines provides another indication of perception's complexity. This profound problem - the infinite search space for perceptual representation - looms over all other current psychological concerns. We live in a sea of complexity (Peterson & Flanders, 2002). The boundaries of the objects we manipulate are not simply given by those objects. Every object or situation can be perceived, in an infinite number of ways (Medin and Aguilar, 1999), and each action or event has an infinite number of potential consequences. Thus, as the robotics engineer Brooks (1991a; 1991b) points out, echoing Eysenck (1995), perception is the "essence of intelligence" and the "hard part of the problems beings solved." The world does not present itself neatly, like rows of tins on a shelf. Nature cannot be easily cut at her joints. We frame our objects by eradicating vast swathes of information, intrinsically part of those objects and categories, but irrelevant to our current, subjectively-defined purposes (Norretranders, 1998). How do we manage this miracle of simplification? We will address this question from a neurodevelopmental and evolutionary perspective.
The nature of reality
The reality of things consists in their persistent forcing themselves upon our recognition. If a thing has no such persistence, it is a mere dream. Reality, then, is persistence, is regularity. (C. S. Peirce)
1 ("a new, deep, epistemological problem," according to Daniel Dennett (1984, p. 129)).
3
The affordances of the environment are what it offers the animal, what it provides or furnishes, either for good or ill. (J. J. Gibson)
Nothing exists except atoms and empty space; everything else is opinion. (Diogenes Laertius)
The objects and categories we use are neither things nor labels for things.2 Instead, "objects" are entities bounded by their affective relationship to a goal.3 We perceive meaningful phenomena, not the objective world. The intuitions that guide us are pragmatic and embodied (Gibson, 1979; Lakoff, 1987). Objects have certain properties, at the "basic-level" category system we are biologically prepared to use (Brown, 1986). They are solid, opaque, massive, and reasonably permanent - features that become salient because of their consequence for action. Solid objects can be gripped and manipulated. Density and solidity thus seem more real than experiences such as color. Our embodied, basic-level intuitions also lead us to understand the constituent elements of the objects we manipulate as bits of matter, increasingly smaller, but similar in kind. Gibson defined the "ambient optic array at a point of observation" as the central concept of ecological optics (Gibson, 1979, p. 65). This array is a heterogeneous, differentiated arrangement. Such an array necessarily surrounds the point of observation in ecological space. "The structure of an optic array, so conceived, is without gaps.... completely filled. Every component is found to consist of smaller components. Within the boundaries of any form, however small, there are always other forms" (p. 68). These observations are for forging an understanding of the real. Gibson also pointed out that the array is segregated, perceptually, into a
2 (as St. Augustine originally proposed)
3J. J. Gibson described such entities as affordances: "an affordance is neither an objective property nor a subjective property; or, it is both if you like. An affordance cuts across the dichotomy of subjective-objective and helps us to understand its inadequacy. It is equally a fact of the environment and a fact of behavior. It is both physical and psychical, yet neither. An affordance points both ways, to the environment and to the observer" (Gibson, 1979, p. 129).
4
perspective structure, changing with every displacement of the point of observation, and an invariant structure, common to multiple points of observation.
Democritus, who formulated ancient atomic theory, noted that the void in which atoms were distributed was just as real as the atoms themselves. This seemingly self-evident observation has many interesting consequences. Atoms can differ in arrangement, given space. This allows for both randomness and ordered pattern, or array. Something random can only be represented by something as complex as the random elements themselves.4 Ordered arrays, by contrast (where some elements repeat) can be represented by using elements within the pattern to stand for the whole. A square composed of an equally-spaced 4 X 4 array of dots is thus " line of 4 dots repeated 4 times." Representation of the whole by the part, akin to Miller's (1956) chunking, massively decreases computational complexity. Now, modern space is more complex than that of Democritus: it is spacetime, with 4 dimensions - height, length, width, and time. This means that the constituent elements of things are arranged in a (quantized) 4-dimensional array of varying heterogeneity.
Intelligible arrays have been identified at many levels of resolution: from that of the quark, 1/10,0002 as large as an atom, to the supra-galactic, at 1025 meters. All things-in-themselves exist simultaneously at all those levels, and partake in multiple arrays, at each level. A perceptible object is thus an array segregated, arbitrarily and for subjective, purposeful reasons, from its participation in endless other arrays. However, some aspect of the original array must be retained. Otherwise, the object cannot be said to truly exist, and must be regarded as fantasy. Those aspects of the spacetime array we perceive as objects tend (1) to be homogeneous at some resolution-level in some structural aspect against a comparatively heterogeneous background; (2) to persist for a biologically-relevant length of time; and (3) to serve as affordances or obstacles in
4 This is something equivalent to Kolmogorov complexity.
5
relationship to a goal. Knowledge of these facts help us understand (1) how the object can have a subjective property (as an affordance, for example), (2) why the object is less than the thing-in-itself and (3) how the object can still be empirically "real." The perceived object is simpler than the thing-in-itself (a prerequisite to comprehension) - while remaining importantly related to the actual thing. This relationship is the encoding of some genuine regularity across some dimension(s). The perceived object is thus a low-resolution image of the thing-in-itself. The concept, in turn, is an abstracted simplification of the perceived object (but retains some not-entirely-subjective relationship to that object).5
The constituent elements of an object, the object itself, and the many objects and situations of which the object itself is a constituent element are all equally real. All of this extraneous reality must be stripped away, before a given object can be seen or put to use, by applying a pragmatic framework of reference to the object, specifying its relationship to a goal. Perception simplifies the world, without sacrificing functional grip. The perceiver learns what resolution-level is relevant to a given operation by interacting pragmatically with the patterns amenable to perception. The pattern that manifests itself at the appropriate level is granted object status. In every act of perception, therefore, entropy at some levels of resolution is reduced to a minimum, while at others it is allowed to approach the infinite. Thus the complexity characterizing the thing-in-itself can be successfully, if temporarily, dealt with.
When we see, we do not see much of what is there (Simons & Rensink, 2005). The fact that each object-pattern is involved in many invisible arrays means that things have many invisible properties. This is a good thing, when new problems emerge. Old objects can be investigated for new properties. However, it
5 This implies as well, that the perceptual object is an axiom of the concept and, conversely, that an object may be nothing more than an well-practiced concept - of the species, the social group, or the individual, following Barsalou (1983). What is axiomatic about the object is that it is a representation of the thing-in-itself, sufficient for some delimited purpose. What is axiomatic about the concept is that it is a sufficient representation of the object.
6
is also a bad thing. Since each object-pattern is involved in many arrays, we can perceive incorrectly. Furthermore, the outcome of a hypothetically finite act cannot be definitively calculated. This means simplified knowledge and constant blindness - but also endless opportunity for error. What we fail to see can manifest itself, unexpectedly, forcing us to traumatically attend to objects of perception that appear utterly new (though they may have been lurking in the background, forever).
The Meaning of Meaning
The world therefore manifests itself to us, as religious thinkers and philosophers alike have insisted, in the form of meaning. Such meaning, however, does not take a single form. Instead, it makes itself known in 3 different classes. The 1st class includes the most basic, universal and evolved forms of functional simplifications. This class, meanings of the known, familiar or determinate world, includes the meanings of individual and social identity that simplify and structure the world. The 2nd class includes those that arise to challenge the integrity of our current known or determinate-worlds. This class, meanings of the unknown, foreign or indeterminate world, includes the meanings of anomaly or novelty - the unexplored world. The 3rd class includes those that arise as a consequence of the integrated interaction of the first two classes. This class, meanings of the conjunction of the known and the unknown, includes the meanings arising in the course of voluntary exploratory behaviour. These are the existential meanings intrinsic to individual experience. Consideration of all 3 classes provides a comprehensive, differentiated portrait of meaning, free from paradox.
The Known, Orderly, Explored, Determinate World:
Motivation-Action-Perception (MAP) Schemas and their Hierarchies
MAP Schema, considered as individual units
If it is impossible to perceive the world, how do we do it? The simple answer is that we don't. We sense it well enough so that some live long enough to
7
reproduce. We maintain our integrity, momentarily, while the complexity of the world swirls around us, and lays us low. Induction is a scandal because things change - on different timeframes and scales, but on every timeframe and every scale, eventually. Thus, no solution to the problem of perception is final. In the face of such change, Darwinian hyper-production of potential solutions, allied with severe post-production culling, maintains life. Life-forms vary, in tandem with the endless transformations of the world. Enough variation exists, so that a solution to each deviation from inductive predictability has so far been found. The price paid for this, however, is endless deadly failure. Most genes fail to propagate themselves across the generations. Most species go extinct.
Some forms and strategies, nonetheless, have proved themselves, and have been conserved. These are evident at different levels of resolution, from the sub-cellular, where the symbiosis between mitochondria and eukaryotic cell has lasted for several 100 million years, to the individual, comprised of the uneasy union between the single-minded personalities of thirst, hunger, sexuality, and aggression, through the social, where the dominance-hierarchy structure governing individual relationships has ruled for at least 100 million years. Such forms and strategies allow us to cope with the slowest-changing of patterned complexities: our biological structures presume air, water, light, and darkness, although some of these things have been and may again become scarce. More short-term psychological realities are also presumed: social structure, cooperation and aggression, to name a few.
It is motivation that provides the most stable of the psychological strategies. Motivation does not drive behavior, deterministically; nor does it simply set goals. Instead, it provides the current state of being with boundaries and values (Barsalou, 1983). These remain unquestioned, if current action produces its desired ends. These bounded states may be conceptualized as determinate micro-worlds of experience - as motivation, action and perception
8
(MAP) schemas. As there are qualitatively different states of motivation, such as hunger, thirst, lust or aggression (Rolls, 1999; Swanson, 2000), there are multiple MAP schemas, manifesting themselves singly and sequentially. The basic MAP schema consists firstly of perceptions of point a, the undesired beginning-state, and point b, the desired end-state, and secondly of motor actions designed to bring about the transformation of the former to the latter (Peterson, 1999). Objects and events relevant to the current schema are perceived; those assumed irrelevant fade into non-existence. Human beings are low-capacity processors, with an apprehension capacity of < 7 objects (Cowan, 2001; Miller, 1956). Our perceptions, tuned by our motivational systems, are limited by our working memory: a good goal thus requires consideration of no more things than we can track. Perhaps it is in this manner that we determine when to deconstruct a task into sub-goals - all goals are motivated; all reasonable goals are perceptually and cognitively manageable.
A given MAP schema arises as a consequence of insufficiency, emerging along a basic motivational dimension. This can be brought about by a decrement in the value of the present, or the imagining of a better futuret. The emergence of a particular motivation induces a state of radical world-simplification. Someone sexually deprived, for example, increasingly frustrated by the present, and increasingly sees the future, single-mindedly, as a place of physical satiation. The motivational significance of beginning-and-end states is given by biology, or secondarily and rapidly derived from biology through learning. We confront the environment with loneliness, playfulness, hunger, thirst and sexual yearning (Panksepp, 1998). We will work to increase wealth, however, after learning its association with pleasure, satiation, and dominance-hierarchy position.
How therefore might motivation be given its proper place, in the study of perception? We might start with an analysis of the most basic animal strategies, building in stages from there, seeing how evolution solves the problem. Swanson
9
(2003) describes the relationship between the simplest multi-cellular animal, the sponge, and the complex thing-in-itself. The sponge lacks a CNS, entirely. Instead, it is composed of "sensorimotor" cells, arranged in an array, all over its body. This array maps limited detectible environmental patterns directly on to a specialized range of motor actions, with no perceptual intermediation. At this primitive level, it is not objects that evoke responses. Instead, the same cells are used for detection and output, and one pattern evokes another. The hydra, a stage above the sponge, possesses a primitive, differentiated CNS, with sensory, neural and motor cells. Thus, it can detect a wider range of patterns, and map them on to more actions. Neural cell intermediation provides the precursor to perception, so that the same "thing" can produce different outputs, but the hydra still essentially pattern-matches. With such increased flexibility, the hydra appears to have an advantage over the sponge, but it is handicapped in one manner: speed. Information moving across more switches means longer reaction time. This problem becomes acute, as the nervous system increases in complexity. Conscious human perception can take .5 seconds (Libet, 1999). Sensory systems therefore retain dual branches: one to the motor system, for reflex-like speed; the other, to the cortex, for slower elaboration of response (Swanson, 2003). As behaviour proceeds from reflexive to voluntary, among complex animals, it is regulated by an increasingly complex control hierarchy (Swanson, 2000). At the simplest level, somatomotor neuron pools in the spinal cord ventral horn innervate the musculature of the major limbs. At the next level (the locomotor pattern generator), operations are are surprisingly sophisticated6 although still spinally
6 A "spinal" animal (one that is classically paralyzed as a consequence of surgical severing of the spinal cord from the brain) can still manifest coordinated limb movements characteristic of locomotion if suspended above a moving treadmill, with its limbs in contact with the surface of the treadmill (Swanson, 2000). This means that the spine, in isolation, is essentially capable of walking if sensory input reminiscent of locomotion is received by the spinal pattern generator. However, the spinal animal is not capable of any spontaneous or voluntarily-controlled or even complex involuntarily-controlled motor behavior. Note that what this means, at least from one viewpoint, is that the "representation" of the treadmill-stimuli is, from the spinal perspective, "move limbs in walking pattern" - without any intermediation of representation independent of or abstracted from the treadmill. The spinal animal is therefore clearly not using an object-
10
localized and reflexive. Animals with the brain-body connection severed at a higher level, midbrain, are still without spontaneous motor behavior. However, when severely stimulated, they can manifest complex actions, which can be adapted to new situations (Whalen, 1998). This midbrain region is a locomotor pattern initiator - a area producing action to more abstract stimuli than those associated with, for example, a treadmill.
The hypothalamus basically constitutes the next stage of the hierarchy, the locomotor pattern controller. Its presence in an otherwise decerebrate animal allows for spontaneous behaviour, of the fundamental, survival-oriented kind: ingestive, defensive, and reproductive. Hypothalamic animals are hyperactive in contrast to midbrain animals, who do not eat, drink, or manifest spontaneous defensive behaviors, and to intact animals, whose behavior is more specifically regulated.7 It is the hypothalamic medial nuclei which are particularly involved in behavioral control. These may be divided into the rostral segment, governing ingestion, reproduction and defense, and the caudal segment, governing foraging and exploration. The rostral segment sets particular goals: food, a mate, escape from predation. The caudal segment, by contrast, controls the initial analysis of the unexpected and unexplored. It includes the mammillary body, controlling head direction, the ventral tegmental area, origin of dopaminergic incentive reward circuitry (Legault & Wise, 2002) and locomotor behavior, and the reticular part of the substantia nigra, regulating the orienting movements of the eyes, head, neck and upper limbs (Swanson, 2000). The hypothalamus thus functions as follows: The rostral segment generates a MAP schema, oriented towards some basic end, implementing appropriate perceptions and actions. If the
like representation of the treadmill to initiate its locomotion behavior. Instead, the treadmill sensory pattern or array is mapped more or less directly onto a walking output motor pattern.
7 The hypothalamus has developed subsystems providing integrated control of all three subsections of the motor system: somatomotor, governing the operation of skeletal, voluntary muscle; autonomic, innervating smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and glands; and neuroendocrine, exerting its effects through the pituitary (Swanson, 2000, p. 116). The hypothalamus also regulates temperature and the sleep/wake cycle.
11
schema succeeds, another, based in a different primary motivation, rapidly supersedes it. If it fails, however, the caudal segment switches to exploratory mode, and gathers more information. Thus, at the psychological level of analysis, (1) the external world is mapped on to motor output, before it is perceived; (2) such mapping transforms itself into object-perception, as the CNS develops in complexity; (3) a tight connection remains between sensation and action, even when perceptual intermediation arises; and (4) - most importantly - that the schema within which an object is perceived is controlled by hypothalamically grounded, goal-directed motivation.
To identify some end as valuable means to grant it consummatory-reward status, formally, as "end" implies consummation. "Consummatory reward" has well-defined, relevant and oft-instinctive features (Rolls, 1999). The human capacity for abstraction means, however, that the hypothetical, arbitrary or symbolic may also come to function as consummatory reward; may serve as goal and indicate satiety, so that current behaviours can be terminated; may come to frame the perception of "objects," evaluated as incentives, threats and punishments (Peterson, 1999). Such consequences of goal-setting are universal, regardless of the specifics of the goal. This means that the cortex modulates archaic motivational systems by substituting abstractions for primordial goals and that goals might be considered, generally, as a class, so that the diversity of potential goals can be ignored, and the goalas serve as object of discussion. We establish point "b," the ideal endpoint of our linear activity. We specify and evaluate our starting point "a," and our actions, in reference to that ideal. We strive to transform "a" into "b," testing possible solutions to the now-bounded frame problem. We become anxiety-ridden or frustrated as a consequence of our failures, manifold and common. Alternatively, we embody a solution, as a consequence of favourable mutation, or stumble across an answer, communicate our successes, and move up the dominance hierarchy. Our MAP schema solutions
12
are inevitably evolutionary, phylogenetically (as our successful genes accumulate) and ontogenetically (as we try many useless approaches, and conserve those that work).
MAP schema considered in their social/hierarchical multiplicity
Basic motivation helps solve the problem of pragmatic world simplification, but a multitude of problems remain. First are issues of sequence and time frame: in what order should a set of MAP schemas manifest themselves, over the day, or week, or year? Second is the related issue of importance: which MAP schemas should be granted priority of value? Third is the even more complex third problem, that of social being: how should I adjust my MAP schemas to those around me (who are facing, and trying to solve, the same problems)? It is identity, the idiosyncratic structure of personal integration, that solves these problems. Thus, personal identity shades into the social; personal and social identity is the emergent, unconscious, automatic consequence of the co-operative/competitive generation, sequencing and rank-ordering of MAP schemas. Such organization manifests itself intrapsychically and socially as the dominance hierarchy. Status is the most important determinant of survival and reproductive success. Establishment of a predictable dominance hierarchy allows for orderly resource access, so that every consummatory attempt does not end in competitive violence. Status tracking is so important (Abbott et al., 2003; Virgin & Sapolosky, 1997) that group and neocortical size are tightly correlated, among primates (Joffe & Dunbar, 1997), and advancement is worth fighting for. Juvenile chimps, our close cousins (Sibley & Ahlquist, 1984), share many MAP schema with children, including those related to dominance-hierarchy manoeuvring. These manifest themselves first, innocently enough, as teasing (De Waal, 1996). Teasing becomes more serious with age, but less frequent. The infant engages in little pushes from behind, jumping away when the adult reacts. The adolescent male manifests full-fledged charging displays, seeking to dominate peers and,
13
eventually, higher-ranking adults. Adults form sophisticated coalitions, jockeying for position. Such jockeying can become horrifically violent (De Waal, 1996).
The fact of innate dominance striving, however, buttressed by aggression, does not mean that chimps or humans lack social feeling, or that they simply come to inhibit their aggression through fear or forethought. Primates are gregarious, as much as aggressive, even in the aftermath of violent encounters (De Waal, 1989a). Agonistic and cooperative behaviors are not simply opposed to one another. More aggressive social creatures may have to be more affiliative (De Waal, 1989a; Abbott et al., 2003). Interaction can be cooperative at one level, and competitive at another. The dominance hierarchy is in fact a form of extended cooperation, establishing the frame for within-hierarchy striving, and aggression is counterbalanced by two powerful regulatory processes. One is innate and internal;; the other, emergent and social. The internal process is empathy, the ability to feel another's experiences (Preston & De Waal, 2002).8 The maternal circuitry governing empathy is deeply rooted (Panksepp, 1998), and modulates response to those deemed kin.9
Chimps are predatory. They hunt monkeys and raid foreign conspecifics (Wrangham & Peterson, 1996). A chimp might even maim or kill a troupe-mate, during intensely agonistic disputes. Clearly, there is no inevitable internal limit on their aggressive MAP schemas. De Waal (1989b) has suggested, instead, that it is the whole troupe that constrains the ambitious individual, becoming agitated en masse when any battle goes too far. Thus, a well-socialized individual may not generally need a super-ego10 If he is acceptable to his peers, the modulating effect of their reactions will remain at hand, and effective. When human children are
8 In addition, of course, to the basic inhibition produced by fear.
9 A wide range of animals exhibit empathic reactions to distressed conspecifics, including rats, hyenas and rhesus monkeys (Rice & Gainer, 1962; Rice, 1964;Yoerg, 1991; Masserman et al., 1964). Likewise, human infants cry when others cry (Zahn-Waxler, Radke-Yarrow and King, 1979), imitate others' distress, and help, spontaneously (Zahn-Waxler, Radke-Yarrow & Brady-Smith, 1977; Miller, Eisenberg, Fabes & Shell, 1996).
10 Something terrifying to consider, in the human case, given our belief in individual morality, but potentially sufficient explanation for brutality like that manifested at Nanking (Chang, 19XX).
14
socialized, they learn socialized alternatives to violence, which serve as more effective means to social status. They do not simply inhibit the primal aggressive circuits. Instead, they integrate these circuits into more sophisticated behavioural games. The child organizes her primary impulses into higher-order, low-resolution MAP schema, within the confines of the dominance hierarchies she inhabits.
Such organization is mediated by empathy, and then by play. Play is early social cognition: when children play, they adapt their actions to each other. They produce and then share a perspective, and work towards a common goal. They embody the same MAP schema, to the benefit of both. The capacity to do so unfolds developmentally, starting with the body, in direct physical contact with others' bodies (Smith & Boulton, 1990). The maturing child begins by constructing small-scale motor patterns, designed to attain individually-motivated ends. "Play is purely individual," at this stage. "Ritualized schemas" develop - skilled play habits - but no collective patterns, much less rules (Piaget, 1932, p. 16-18). The child plays alone, practicing a repertoire of functional actions and conceptions, from the spinal bottom of Swanson's (2000) control hierarchy to the cortical top. Before there are stateable rules, there are behavioral patterns. As the child progresses, complex social understanding emerges. The child imitates himself, using procedure to map procedure, at the initial, embodied stage of genuine representation. Any successful MAP schema is immediately replicated, practiced, automatized and readied for future employment (Piaget, 1932). Imitation then extends to others. Patterned social interactions begin to emerge, as the play partners' exchange information about which (re)actions are desirable, and a prototypical morality emerges (even among rats11 (Panksepp, 1998). Control
11 When juvenile rats are paired together, repeatedly, in rough-and-tumble wrestling bouts, one rat will end up on top more frequently. However, if the now-dominant rat pins its playmate more than 70% of the time, the subordinate, who initiates play sequences, begins to ignore the victor, and play diminishes (Panksepp, 1998). The dominant rat must learn to respond
15
over MAP schema formation shifts to emergent systems of more complex control. Hippocampal maturation allows for determination by context (LeDoux, 1996). The orbitofrontal and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices increasingly grant abstractions value-status (Krawczyk, 2002), removing the individual from the short-term horizon of basic motivation (Pochon, Levy, Fossati et al., 2002).
Higher-order, more explicit, cooperative morality emerges around 7 (Piaget, 1932). Each child now tries to win, to dominate the hierarchy of game achievement. At first glance, this appears competitive. However, all disagreements about the game have to be resolved before any attempt to play, let alone win, can begin, and all striving must remain civilized enough that the game can continue. Even these more complex play forms emerge procedurally, rather than explicitly. If the playing children are separated, and interviewed individually, they give disparate accounts of the emergent game's "rules." They still need the information provided by the others' presence to maintain the game. Once a game becomes, a regular occurrence, however, it can be explicitly codified. Then patterns that constitute the game, and the explicit description of the game, come into alignment. The children map their own socially-modified sensorimotor outputs, and become conscious players (Piaget, 1932), able to inhabit fictional, social, dramatic worlds (highly abstracted and communal MAP schema). It is the ability to establish these joint schemas that allows for the modulation of motivation and emotion toward some shared end. In a good game, there are many opportunities for joint gain. There is no need to be predatory, or defensive, so there is little need for violence. Well-socialized adults add their opinions to the process, insisting that the players' play fair, and act as good sports: "How you play the game is more important than whether you win or lose." The adults know, implicitly, that life is a sequence of games, and that those who play properly
to the cues of the subordinate, if it wishes to keep playing. Such modulation lays the foundation for the higher-order morality keeping aggression and other potentially antisocial schema properly regulated - even among rats.
16
during a given game become the popular players of many games, and benefit cumulatively from playing each. Thus, a vital form of meta-morality emerges: the best player is he who is invited to play the most games. Sacrificing a future invitation for present victory is a counterproductive long-term strategy.
A purely personal MAP schema specifies starting place, goal, objects of perception, and implication for emotion, dealing with the bits of the world relevant to a particular desire. The joint construction of such schema integrates perception across individuals, placing them in the same world of objects, aligning their emotions. Diverse individuals inhabit the same experiential space, cooper-ating both to reach a goal and to maintain the space's integrity. This is how fundamental agreements emerge, nullifying the very necessity for aggression - or for terror. For the socialized, within the intact dominance hierarchy, the unbearable present predictably turns into the desirable future. Everyone plays the same game, with the same rules, at the same time. Emotion remains controlled.
The specific circuitry mediating such concordance has been recently outlined. Rizzolatti, Fogassi and Gallese (2001) describe the behavior of certain visuomotor neurons, located in the ventral premotor cortex. Some are motor neurons, but also respond to visual stimuli. Some are activated by 3-D objects. The most relevant, however, "mirror neurons - require action observation for their activation" (p. 661). Mirror neurons, part of the system that uses motor-output patterning as the basis of perception, have remarkable properties. They do not respond to a motivationally significant object in isolation. Nor do they respond to the sight of a conspecific engaged in context-independent action, such as grasping. But they do respond to the sight of a conspecific grasping in the presence of a motivationally significant object. More to the point, their responses match, when a motivated sequence is observed and when it is enacted. This congruence can be strict, coinciding in goal and behavioral sequence. Sometimes, however, the congruence is broader; generalizing "the goal of the observed action
17
across many instances of it" (p. 662). This is akin to a child's playing the role of father, rather than precisely imitating any of father's specific behaviors. A neural mechanism allowing both for imitation and the abstraction of imitation has thus been identified.
Mirror-neuron mediating understanding cascades downward from the abstract, through the emotional, to the physical. The mirror system accepts sensory, cognitive and circadian state inputs, and produces somatic, endocrine, and neuroendocrine output (Swanson, 2000). Area F5, which contains the mirror neurons, shares connectivity to inferior parietal lobe with area "a" of the superior temporal sulcus - part of a circuit including amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex (Amaral et al., 1992). This implies that mirroring extends beyond action, to its emotional, motivational, cognitive and neuroendocrine concomitants. F5 has other relevant functions, as well. It is the primate homologue of Broca's area, which has come to govern voluntary speech. The development of the mirror neuron system allows a maturing child to embody the action and motivational states of those he directly observes, with greater or lesser fidelity. The linguistic abilities of Broca's area, integrated with the mirror neuron circuitry, allow communicating children to verbally instantiate shared MAP schema, not at the level of precise imitation, but at a higher, generalized state. Thus, children engaged in pretend play can coordinate their motivations, emotions, actions, and perceptions. Such processes of coordination, within such schema, lay the groundwork for the understanding of imagistic and more abstract semantic thought, including drama and fiction, and the ability to engage in increasingly adult-scale social enterprises. A plan is the projection of a compelling fiction onto agreed-upon objects and contexts. The successful joint establishment of such a plan, motivationally significant, emotionally gripping, eliminates the very necessity for uncertainty, anxiety and conflict. This all means, as well, that it is not precisely individuals who occupy a given position in a given dominance hierarchy. MAP schema themselves cooperate and
18
compete, within and between individuals. The intrapsychic and social structure that results is the consequence of that process. Thus, in a properly formulated dominance hierarchy, the presuppositions of the individuals match the structure of the group. This keeps the group stable and the individuals affectively regulated. Any challenge to this match (and not simply to the intrapsychic or social structures themselves) therefore simultaneously dysregulates motivation and emotion.
The Unknown, Chaotic, Unexplored, Indeterminate World:
Novelty, Anomaly and MAP Schema Disruption
The frame consisting of point "a" and point "b" can well be considered a theory-laden MAP schema. Such a schema is also a story, however, in its simplest form, analogous to the necessary fiction of Vaihinger (1924) and Adler (Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1956), the life-space/field of Lewin (1935), the Dasein of the phenomenologists (Binswanger, 1963; Boss, 1963) and the normal science of Kuhn (1970). A MAP schema is also a cybernetic unit (see Weiner, 1948). A broad, interdisciplinary consensus has emerged around the cybernetic framework, based on the assumption that goal-directed, self-regulatory systems constantly compare what is to what should be, while attempting to reduce mismatch. Piaget (1954) adopted many cybernetic preconceptions, including the belief that "all knowledge is tied to action... on the most elementary sensory-motor level and all the way up to the highest logical-mathematical operations" (Glaserfield, 1982, p. 613; Glaserfield, 1999). Luria (1960, 1980), Sokolov (1963) and Vinogradova (1961, 1975) were also heavily influenced by Wiener.12All four served as precursors to Gray (1982; 1987; Gray & McNaughton, 2003). Miller, Galanter and Pribram (1960) used cybernetic principles, as did Powers (1973a, 1973b) and Schank and Abelson (1977). Similar ideas have emerged with regards to emotions and their role in giving value to objects of apprehension (Damasio, 1994; Jung, 1971, pp. 433-436) and indicating the interruption of goals (Oatley & Johnson-
12 who published Cybernetics in Moscow in 1958 and lectured there in 1960 (Feigenbaum, 1961).
19
Laird, 1987; Oatley, 1992; Oatley & Jenkins, 1992).
Luria, Sokolov, Vinogradova and Gray (LSVG) hypothesized, specifically, that complex organisms developed a complete internal model of the world and how it should unfold, as a consequence of current actions, and continuously contrasted this internal model, this expectation, with what was, in fact, occurring. When things go according to plan, according to this hypothesis, positive affect rules, ensuring that current goal-directed conceptions and actions dominate (Gray, 1982; Rolls, 1999). When something unexpected occurs, by contrast, the orienting reflex, a sequence of rapid preparatory responses, manifests itself. Current goal-directed actions cease (Gray, 1982), when mismatch between desire and world emerges, detected by the septal-hippocampal comparator systems. Lower brain circuit function, including the amygdalic, is disinhibited, activating circuitry in the right hemisphere (Tucker & Frederick, 1989) and, later in the processing chain, inhibiting the frontal and prefrontal systems of the left cortical hemisphere, associated with positive emotion (Davidson, 1992). The autonomic nervous system is engaged. Heart rate rises (Fowles, 1980), in preparation for non-specific action, and cortisol floods the bloodstream (Gray, 1987). Startle responses, primitive but fast, governed by brainstem circuitry, produce virtually instantaneous physiological defensive postures, designed to protect the body, particularly the head and neck (Yeomans, Li, Scott & Frankland, 2002). This is followed by activation of circuits in the superior colliculus, which direct the sensory systems of the head towards the environmental locale that quick-and-dirty systems have specified as the source of the anomaly (Dean, Redgrave & Westby, 1989). Hypothalamic systems, particularly those in the rostral segment, ready fight or flight, another aspect of defensive response, in concert with the pain-sensitive systems of the periaqueductal grey (Swanson, 2000). Finally, the extended amygdala (the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis) enhances vigilance, and provisionally associates the anomalous occurrence with
20
anomalies that in the past have produced negative outcomes (Hooker, Germine, Knight & D'Esposito, 2006). This comparator theory, advanced most completely by Gray, has become exceedingly influential, across wide domains of psychological inquiry. It remains predicated, nonetheless, on four assumptions about perception that can no longer be maintained. Thus, the role the hierarchical arrangement of MAP schema plays in affect regulation has not yet been fully appreciated.
Sokolov's (1963) subjects responded with an orienting reflex to the tiniest alterations in lab stimuli. He used auditory tones, and elicited a galvanic skin response to any alteration in volume, tempo, or irregularity in tone onset or offset. It was this sensitivity that produced LSVG's first error: the hypothesis of complete objective modeling. Later researchers demonstrated that orienting only occurs toward "differences that make a difference" (Bargh & Chartrand, 1999; Simons & Rensink, 2005) -anomalies that interfere actively with current goal-directed activity - and not to all stimulus change. Modeling is thus far from complete. Consciousness attends selectively, to the minimum set of elements necessary to bring about the desired transformation. LSVG assumed, secondly, that the CNS compared incoming objective sensory data (reality) and expectation (construed cognitively). As behaviourists, they presumed that stimuli were objectively real and simply given, and they gave short shrift to motivation. Living creatures do not so much expect things as desire them. Desire is motivation, and it is motivational systems that fundamentally give rise to MAP schema. For LSVG, mismatch meant error, error meant anxiety, and anxiety indicated that behaviour must be retooled. Mismatch, however, is much more than the problem of erroneous action, but this cannot be understood without due consideration of motivation. If the desired future fails to appear, it is not only current actions that might be wrong: current desire might be wrong, as well. Perhaps the MAP schema is motivated by jealousy, for example, and the situation is such that
21
jealousy merely makes things worse.
Thirdly, it is not reality that is compared with expectation (now: desire). We are not privy to reality, even in the present. Current "actuality" is modeled, much as future "possibility." Sometimes you cannot get from point "a" to point "b," because you are not actually at point "a." We compare a motivated model of the present to a motivated model of the future. In the case of error, this means that the very way we perceive things, present and future, might be incorrect. Failure re-presents us with the frame problem. This is a very serious problem indeed, given all the different ways that the complex world of things and situations can be perceived. Whatever anxiety might arise at the failure of our actions is nothing compared with the terror of having to recalibrate our perceptions. LSVG were not nearly pessimistic enough about error. When what is desired does not manifest itself, motivation and perception, as well as cognition and action, might all be incorrect - and anywhere in their structure.
This brings us to the fourth and final element missing in the standard account: the implications of hierarchical MAP-schema structure (see also Carver & Scheier, 1998). In the absence of such nesting, it would be impossible to disinhibit motivation and emotion at different levels of intensity, when anomalies of different significance emerge. All errors would be equally overwhelming or irrelevant. However, varying errors indeed produce various reactions. Each mistake cannot be evaluated, cognitively, however. There is insufficient time for that. Instead, potential meaning is bounded, a priori, by the breadth/import of the current MAP schema. Large-scale MAP schemas are built from the bottom up, following Piaget and Swanson, established at spinal levels; organized into more complexly sequenced routines, represented as abstractions, communicated and verbally organized into long-term plans. A large-scale plan thus consists of smaller plans, which consist of even smaller plans, which eventually ground out in muscle movement itself. Thus, the mind meets the body. Development is
22
simultaneous higher-order organization of intrapsychic and social MAP schemas. Affective stability, particularly at higher-order levels, is dependent upon the match between them. Imagine an inverted neural hierarchy, representing MAP schema import: mismatch disruption of schemas closer to the point of the V are more upsetting. The meaning of a high-resolution schema depends on its role as a sub-element of a lower-resolution schema: grades in a pre-med class only matter in the broader context of wanting to be a physician.
The objects specified by a given MAP schema are positively valenced - the 1st dimension of emotion - if their appearance indicates (1) that progress is occurring, and (2) that the structural integrity of the currently operative schema is valid and intact. A working schema is therefore self-verifying, as well as providing direct, dopaminergically-mediated (Gray, 1982) incentive reward. Obstacles, by contrast, are negatively valenced (the 2nd basic emotional dimension). Their appearance indicates a schema-world mismatch, danger to current progress, and the fact that the current MAP schema (or hierarchy) may not be functional. If an obstacle does appear, it should first be evaluated for significance at narrowest and most specific level possible. Such use of Occam's razor limits the spread of chaotic emotion. Elements of self differ in degree, not in kind: the upheaval produced by an obstacle is proportionate to the area of space and time structured by the erroneous schema. The solution may lie close to hand, if the obstacle is merely something expected under different circumstances. Other times, however, the obstacle is too radically unknown for such easy dealings. Then the complexity of things re-emerges, with incomputable consequences. The borders between things become questionable, and everything is up for grabs. This is the problem of chaos, vs. order - the eternal problem, and the ultimate reality of the world.
We derive one important form of meaning -security and hope - from the match between our personal MAP schemas and the social world. Such ordered
23
meaning emerges as a consequence of the delimitation of its paired opposite, chaos, whose manifestation produces the second kind of meaning. Maintenance of MAP-schema meaning keeps chaos in check, rather than revealing it (or allows it to be revealed in doses small enough to be tolerable). Determinate positive and negative events occur, as the world manifests itself as tool and obstacle. Irrelevant things occur, too, of course - but are in some important sense never realized. No one can pay attention to all activity; only to all relevant activity. But what of seriously anomalous events? Some occurrences are neither evidently good nor bad, nor immediately eradicable as meaningless. They are not understood, not explored. They cannot be placed into the context of the current MAP schema, nor encapsulated within that schema's hierarchically-ordered larger-scale conceptual surroundings. They violate the frame, interfering with its operation, its integrity, and its relationship to other frames. What must happen in such cases?
What is not comprehended but is still extant must logically be experienced as paradoxical: (Jung, 1967, 1968; Gray, 1982; Peterson, 1999): negative, in potential, positive, in potential, irrelevant, in potential - and self and world in potential, as well. That potential, the true complexity of the world, is chaos. Its manifestation, no mere threat, constitutes a challenge to the full adaptive capacity of the individual. The emergence of chaos produces more than mere anxiety; something more like generalized MAP schema disinhibition and competition, as new and potentially appropriate means of framing war with each other for dominance. Motivation for maintaining meaning is thus not merely desire to reduce anxiety: it is instead desire to avoid the internal and, frequently, external war of competing options - and there is something even deeper about the anomalous event. At some point in psychological development, however hypothetical, all events are anomalous, though they may be rapidly constrained by the social surround. This means that the schemas allowing for the determinate utilization of objects, situations and abstractions are dependent for their
24
construction, initially, on information extracted from the overarching, ever-emerging domain of the unknown. It is for such reasons that chaos is meaningful, a priori, and the mother of determinate being itself.
The appearance of the anomalous involuntarily produces its own specific MAP schema, the orienting reflex, or complex, in more modern terms (Halgren, 1992; Ohman, 1979, 1987). The beginning point of that schema is the insufficiency of present knowledge. The desired endpoint is classification of the anomalous phenomenon, and its reduction to specified meaning. Increased sensory processing and exploratory activity is brought to bear on the uncomprehended circumstance, examined from the perspective of varying MAP schemas: Is it relevant to another motivational state? Can it serve as an affordance or obstacle, and at what level? It is like other irrelevant "objects," and treatable as ground? Such effortful exploration constitutes (1) the process by which identity originally comes to be (Peterson, 1999); (2) the elimination of possibility from the indeterminate domain of the anomalous to the finite domain of a determinate MAP schema; and (3) the reworking of identity, which is the sum total of all such schema. It is here where Swanson's work on hypothalamic function once again becomes relevant. The hypothalamic "rostral behaviour control segment" establishes narrow, biologically relevant MAP schema, ingestive, reproductive and defensive. The caudal segment, by contrast, is the origin point of the ventral tegmental dopaminergic system, which governs approach and exploratory behaviour, and whose activation is experienced as incentive reward. Thus, the hypothalamus has a powerful, primordial backup system, which grips control, when its more specific rostral systems fail in their efforts. Exploration in the face of the unknown is thus as ancient as hunger, thirst, sex and aggression. It is a primary "drive," manifesting itself in the form of the orienting complex, under the control of the septal-hippocampal and anterior cingulate CNS systems.
In 2001, shortly before her death, Vinogradova delivered her final
25
opinions on orienting-complex system function. She described the hippocampus as an interface between primeval brain-stem systems and newer, learning-dependent cortical systems. Sensory information from the outside world is fed in a bottom-up fashion through the brain-stem systems into hippocampal subarea CA3, providing a quick-and-dirty portrait of ongoing events. After a lag, due to increased complexity of processing, information about what is currently desired is fed downward into the hippocampus, first into area CA1, where it is simplified, and then into CA3, where it is compared with the pre-processed brain stem input. If the two inputs match, CA3 sends a message to the raphe nuclei, in the brain stem. These nuclei, in turn, suppress activity of the ascending, excitatory reticular formation, which is responsible for increasing brain "arousal," intensifying attention, increasing sensory throughput (via the thalamus), placing the body in a state of alertness and preparation for action, disinhibiting motivation, heightening anxiety and potentiating exploration. This dissolution into chaos is the nervous system's response to the emergent chaos of nature: as order dissolves and transforms in the natural world, so it must in the intrapsychic and social worlds, so that adaptation can continue. A rat's a priori state in a novel environment, for example, is dysregulation of motivation and affect, heightened alertness, and a slowly developing inclination to explore (Blanchard, Blanchard & Rogers, 1991). This is a phasic behavioral analog to the state of affairs permanently characterizing an animal, decorticated such that its hypothalamus now occupies the highest level of CNS control remaining.
In a nonverbal animal, such as a rat, the transition from frozen anxiety to active exploration and mapping begins with cautious sniffing, under the spell of brain systems that minimize exposure to predators. The animal soon switches to vision, using appropriate head movements; then begins to move, assessing territorial layout and significance as something occurring in response to its own actions (Blanchard et al., 1991). For an isolated rat in a cage, "territory" is
26
something as simple as spatial layout - hence the cognitive map or spatial models of hippocampus function (O'Keefe & Nadel, 1978), buttressed by findings of hippocampal "place cells" (O'Keefe & Dostrovsky, 1971). Other researchers, however, note hippocampal enabling of "transitive associations" (Bunsey & Eichenbaum, 1996) - relations between arbitrary stimuli (Howard, Fotedar, Datey, & Hasselmo, 2005) - and suggest that place cell function is broader identification of context. Context can also mean "behavioral task demand" or meaning (Smith & Mizumori, 2006). Representation of such context may well be equivalent to episodic memory, another hippocampal function (Milner, 19XX).
Investigators assessing"cognitive maps" study the behaviour of isolated animals. However, many animals are highly social, and their environment primarily the local dominance hierarchy they occupy. Primates, like rats, develop detailed maps of their social structures, as they transform across generations and decades. The "place" mapped by the "cognitive map" is thus a social structure, not just a geographical locale. This map is precisely the MAP schema hierarchy, grounded in motivation, expanded through individual socialization into complex human culture. Proper understanding of hippocampal function therefore appears dependent on the assessment of certain features of territories currently given no consideration.13 Territories are not places of relatively predictable objects and their interactions, but complex and dynamic social dramas, whose behaviorally-associated contextual meanings depend upon on the reactions of potentially unpredictable conspecifics. Most animals solve this problem by consorting only with familiar peers, whose behaviours have already been mapped, and which are additionally constrained by their particular positions in the MAP schema hierarchy. The cortex can predict the outcomes of interactions with such conspecifics, and work so they remain positive. These predictions/desires
13 A PubMed search for "hippocampus and "social cognition" reveals a mere 17 articles, only one of which, Spreng & Mar, 2010, is relevant, despite the overwhelming importance of the dominance hierarchy for the mapping of territory.
27
generally match information about a known conspecific's behavior, as it occurs, and is fed, bottom up, into the hippocampus, through the brain stem systems. The hippocampus registers "match," and the arousal systems (anxiety, aggression, panic, exploration, etc.) remain tonically inhibited. No threat is detected. No possibility for damage manifests itself. No disinhibition of motivation and emotion is necessary. No increase in allostatic load (McEwen, 2000), with its stress-induced physiological perturbation and damage, has occurred.
Rats, adapted to a predictable, ecologically-valid social and territorial environment, with nesting burrows, social interactions, and roaming space, react with sheer horror to the unexpected sight of a cat in their heretofore safe, predictable environment (Blanchard, 1989, 1991). The animals' behavior changes dramatically, for 24 hours (equivalent to a human month). Initial freezing, followed by flight to the chamber system, gives way to a period of immobility, during which the rats, petrified by motivational and emotional dysregulation, emit ultrasonic alarm cries, at a high rate. Immobilized crying gradually transforms into "risk assessment," where the cat appeared. The still-stressed but now curious rats poke their heads out of their burrows and scan the previously cat-contaminated open area, for hours. When the rats finally emerge, they explore in a manner that reduces their visibility to predators, employing short "corner runs" in and out of the open area. These exploratory risk assessment actions help the rats gather information about the possible danger source. The marshalling of such information provides the rationale for their return to nondefensive behaviors - "normal life."
The sensitivity of animals to disruption of the dominance structure, and consequent mismatch, can hardly be overstated. Children, much as adults, willingly punish rule-breakers (Piaget, 1932). Analogous behavior pervades the animal kingdom. If a well-loved rat is removed from its familial surroundings, provided with a new odor, and returned, it will be promptly dispatched (Lorenz,
28
1974). Rats identify one another by smell. A "new" rat constitutes "unexplored territory." His presence is thus regarded, not unreasonably, as a threat to security. Chimps - perfectly capable of killing "foreign devils" - act in the same manner (Goodall, 1990). Why do such reactions occur? Because a conspecific in a known action/meaning context is predictable, even desirable. An unfamiliar conspecific, by contrast, could undermine the entire MAP-schema dominance hierarchy structure, as his capacity for challenge and revolution remains unspecified.
The importance of the MAP schema hierarchy, the utility of conceptualizing it as the structure within which experience manifests itself, and its simultaneous intrapsychic and social existence, may be additionally illustrated by the fact that social status transformation produces functional change in the most basic, serotonergic, neurotransmitter system.14 High status elevates serotonergic tone, decreasing negative and increasing positive emotion. If your personal schemas come first, in the social group, your "environment" is stable, productive, and safe, and you are confident, upright, positive and emotionally stable. If your schemas come last, however, everything is negative and dangerous, you are confused, anxious, and depressed, hovering close to the edge of chaos and disintegration. It is for such reasons that hierarchy maintenance and protection is so important, to animal and human alike, and that position within that hierarchy is vital (see Wilkinson & Pickett, 2009).
The consequence of MAP schema shattering, particularly at low-resolution, fundamental levels (Janoff-Bulman, 1992) can be dramatic, neurophysiologically speaking. Post-traumatic stress disorder produces increased susceptibility to anxiety, depression, obesity, infectious illness and heart disease, as well as hippocampal shrinkage, as a consequence of chronically elevated cortisol levels (Brown, Woolston, Frol, et al., 2004). Such shrinkage may occurs
14 The dominance position "counter" is so archaic that it is fully operative in crustaceans, whose physical posturing is adjusted by serotonergic tone, according to their hierarchical positions. They stand taller, more threatening, when victorious in battle, and shrink when they have been defeated.
29
because MAP schema-dependent inhibition of motivation and emotion by the hippocampus should be demolished, when the models the hippocampus relies on to "justify" such inhibition have been proven wrong. Recent research indicates that treatment with "anti-depressant" serotonin reuptake inhibitors - whose biochemical effect essentially mimics the pharmacological state characteristic of stable high-dominance animals (Kravitz, 2000) - allows for hippocampal neurogenesis (Becker & Wojtowicz, 2007), as well as improvement in episodic memory function (Vermetten, Vythilingam, Southwick, Charney & Bremner, 2003). This is likely the physiological manifestation of the reconstruction of a functional MAP schema hierarchy.
Vinogradova's (2001) work also sheds light on the neurophysiological instantiation of the MAP schema, allowing, in potential, for a developmental description of the relationship between the development of schema hierarchies, and their relationship to the tonic regulation of motivation and emotion, extending beyond that of Swanson (2000), to the very domain of abstraction. She points out, first, that "habituation" of the orienting response should be regarded, instead, as "negative learning," and that its disappearance is a consequence of the elaboration of an increasingly detailed model "of the stimulus." This modeling occurs as a consequence of sequential learning in structures that receive CA1 hippocampal field outputs: the mamillary bodies, anterior thalamic nuclei and, finally, the cingulate limbic cortex. The higher up the neural hierarchy above the hippocampus the structure, the more repetitions of the event are necessary to shape the "response." She believes that this hierarchy may be regarded as a chain of integrators, functioning such that each starts to respond only after reaction develops at the previous link, and as a delay line, "preventing premature fixation of spurious, irrelevant, low probability signals" (p. 579). The highest links in the system serve as the "ultimate signal for information fixation in the nonprimary areas of the neocortex." It is probable that the ultimate assumptions of the MAP
30
schema hierarchy, derived from exploration, fixed through repetition, are precisely those governing the rules of social interaction, encoded at the highest level in our explicit conceptions of natural rights (Peterson, 2006). It is these universal "rules," after all, that best specify the nature of peaceful, productive shared territory. Disruption of these most fundamental presumptions - the active breaking of rules, or the verbal justification for such breaking - thus presents a threat to the structure that inhibits hippocampal disinhibition of chaotic motivational and emotional responses, corresponding in intensity to the hierarchical import of the MAP schema level such disruption affects. Thus, it is human societies with the largest differences in opinion with regards to "intrinsic human right" that possess the most capability for mutual disruption of presumption, and its attendant chaotic psychophysiological and social dysregulation.
The Balance between Order and Chaos: Meaning in its Redemptive Form
We have now considered two forms of meaning in detail: that of delimited, pragmatic order, dependent on the match between the intrapsychic and social MAP schemas; and that of chaos, the sum total of all meanings that all phenomena possess, in all the arrays they might occupy. Order structures such chaotic meaning, letting it shine forth in measured doses. When anomaly occurs, by contrast, chaos shines through of its own accord, with sometimes revolutionary and devastating results, and forces the alteration of the structures that delimit and constrain what would otherwise be the overwhelming significance of being.
Many approaches to the maintenance of meaning, including those focusing on terror management (REF), consider individual belief the primary source of meaning, and the purpose of belief the restriction of anxiety and fear. Within such conceptualizations, following Becker (1973) human life is a futile battle: death is the ultimate reality; all meaning systems serve to shield their adherents from that fact. Thus, the maintenance of meaning requires rigid allegiance to a structured
31
system, and morality is merely the conventionality and cowardice described by Nietzsche. The fundamental problem of life, however, is not the terror of death, although that is an important sub-problem. The fundamental problem of life is the overwhelming complexity of being. Animals, like human beings, have to deal with complexity, although they do not necessarily have to deal with the terrors of mortality, at least in their self-conscious forms. They have, however, evolved means of dealing with chaotic complexity, as embodied in their psychophysiological structures. The same is true of human beings, although we have taken the elaboration of the psychological means of dealing with chaos to unprecedented levels of abstraction (and are uniquely aware of our own mortal limitations). In doing so, we have increasingly come to pursue a third class of meaning.
A human being comes into the world with a set of evolutionarily determined tools, some in the form of the very MAP schemas we have discussed. These general-purpose tools help individuals deal with the constant problems of existence, such as hunger and thirst. The problem of the complexity of being is, however, equally constant, or even more so. In consequence, very sophisticated means of dealing with that problem have also evolved. The innovation of social being itself is one such solution. Individuals group themselves into social dominance hierarchies, find their position within the phalanx, and employ the resources of the entire group against the challenges of nature and the unknown. To do so, they rearrange their internal natures, so that they can exist in productive harmony within their group. This grouping requires conflict, war, within or between individuals. As the child, for example, matures, he has to temper his passions so that they reflect his desires, and the desires of the group. Successful negotiation of this conflict of interests is no simple matter of subjugation, either, no mere dominance of the super-ego. The group wants the individual to manifest the possibilities of his being in the manner most beneficial across different spans
32
of time and place and to the smallest and largest number of individuals, simultaneously. The group thus offers the individual the opportunity to extend his powers, as well as forcing their limitation. In what manner must an individual manifest himself, therefore, in order to address all of these intrapsychic and social demands? The answer can be found in a more elaborated analysis of exploratory behaviour and the communication and integration of its consequences. Consider the game, once again - and then, the game of games. The best player is not necessarily he or she who wins a given game, or even a sequence of games. The best player is he who plays such that the game continues, and expands, so that he and others have the greatest chance to play and to excel. When a child is told to be a good sport, this is how he is instructed to behave. The precise rules comprising the meta-game, "be a good sport," may yet be implicit, in large part, too complex to be fully formulated. This does not mean they do not exist. We dream continuously of the individual who will manifest that pattern most successfully, and search for him - or her - everywhere.
What is the best way to successfully play the largest number of games? The answer is not simply computable. Over time different modes of playing emerge, in the attempt to seek the solution. Each individual wants to be maximally valued. Pure aggression is one possible solution. The physically dominant individual can force others to value him as a player. Sufficient display of negative emotion can have the same effect: someone may be invited on multiple occasions into different games by appealing to the sympathy of the other players. These are not optimal solutions, however. Even among chimps, rule of the merely strong is unstable (De Waal, 1989b). Rule of the weak, likewise, breeds resentment: social animals want reciprocity, and will not give continually. Such behaviour is too costly and easily manipulated. Multiple modes of potential playing compete for predominance during childhood. Such competition, and cooperation, extends in a more sophisticated manner, across adult being. What is
33
the victor among those multiple modes, across many individuals? Extend that question further: What is the victorious mode of play across many individuals, across many groups, over historically-significant epochs of time? Consideration of the ancient Mesopotamian myth, the Enuma elish - one of many stories of its type (Peterson, 1999), helps answer that question. Two deities exist at the beginning of time, according to the Enuma elish. Tiamat is the goddess of chaos, as chaos is the mother of all things. She is reptilian in nature, as the reptile has constantly threatened our lives and our societies, while increasing our vision (Isbell, 2009), for tens of millions of years. Apsu, her husband, is the god of order, the foundation of being. The pair nestles together, in the deep, like the two halves of the famous Taoist symbol. Their sexual, creative union gives rise to the elder gods, the primary motivational states. Their dysregulated and careless behaviour results in the death of Apsu, order, and the vengeful re-emergence of his bride. Hastily organizing themselves, in the face of this threat, the elder gods elect Marduk, god of exploration, vision and speech, as King, top of the sacred dominance hierarchy, and send him out to voluntarily confront Chaos, in the guise of his great-grandmother. Emerging victorious, Marduk cuts Tiamat into pieces, and makes the world (Peterson, 1999). This is the oldest and most fundamental story that mankind possesses. It echoes through ancient Egypt, and that state's conceptions of Horus, the redemptive, attentive eye; Isis, the goddess of chaos; and Osiris, the god of the state. It serves as the source for the creation story in the Hebrew bible, and profoundly influences Christianity; it is the story of St. George, and of Christ, the perfect man, the second Adam, and the deadliest enemy of death, and the eternal serpent (Peterson, 1999). Its existence and meaning should not be overlooked by psychologists, increasingly cognizant of the evolutionary shaping of being.
It is time to understand these stories, instead of considering them the superstitious enemy of science. The great myths of mankind are not theories of
34
objective existence. They are, instead, imaginative roadmaps to being. They have emerged, painstakingly, piecemeal, as a consequence of our continual close self-observation, our developing understanding of the patterns of action that are essentially adaptive, and their representation in symbolic, narrative and dramatic form, during the transition from implicit behavioural pattern to explicit communicable form. We tell stories about how to play: not about how to play the game, but about how to play the metagame, the game of games. When chaos threatens, confront it, as quickly as possible, eyes open, voluntarily. Activate the neural circuitry underlying active exploration, inhibiting confusion, fear and the generation of damaging stress responses, and not the circuitry of freezing and escape. Cut the unknown into pieces; take it apart with hands, thumbs and mind, and formulate, or reformulate, the world. Free the valuable gold from the dragon of chaos, transform leaden inertia into gilded action, enhance your status, and gain the virgin maiden - just like the first of your tree-dwelling ancestors (Isbell, 2009) who struck a predatory snake with a stick, chased it away, and earned the eternal gratitude of mother and group.
The third form of meaning has little to do with group identity, except insofar as that serves as a precursor to its formation. It is instead the story of mankind, and the meaning to be experienced when that heroic story is imitated, understood, and embodied. Under the loving tutelage of the ever-virgin mother, guided by the wisdom of his forefathers, the always-threatened nascent hero masters known territory, and becomes keenly aware of its limitations and errors. He sees the danger threatening, before anyone else, because he is willing to see it, while others turn away their eyes: The patriarchal structure has become too rigid and self-serving. The widows and children are being ignored, and God's wrath, in the form of a watery chaos, threatens. Public morality has become too chaotic, and it is time for a return to the individual and collective values that have always ensured the survival of mankind. The hero sacrifices himself to God, offers up his
35
own petty interests to the greatest possible good, confronts the too-rigid social structure or the looming chaos, with nothing but his own courage and truth. It is very easy to be cynical about such things, but we have many modern examples to consider. Gandhi stopped the British Empire dead in its tracks, following Tolstoy, whose morality was directly informed by Orthodox Christianity. Tough-minded observers have noted that Gandhi's strategies would not have worked against Stalin, or Hitler, who would have just had him executed. Nonetheless, single individuals brought down tyrannies of such magnitude in the 20th century, as well. Solzhenitsyn's (1975) Gulag Archipelago, an amazing example of individual courage - of individual use of the Word - demolished the intellectual and moral credibility of communism, forever. Vaclav Havel performed a similar role in Czechoslovakia. It is not for nothing that we consider the individual of the highest value in the West.
The third form of meaning is not to be found in slavish allegiance to a system of beliefs, nor to specific position in a given dominance hierarchy, nor to incautious and wanton exposure to chaos. It is to be found on the border of chaos and order, Yin and Yang, as the Taoists have always insisted. It is to be found in the voluntary pursuit of interest, that subtle prodding by the orienting complex, which turns our heads involuntary towards the most informative places in our experiential fields, and lets us see the glimmers of redemptive chaos shining through the damaged structure of our current schemas. That glimmer is the star that has always guided us, the star that signifies the birth of the hero, and, when followed, is the guardian angel who ensures that the path we trod is meaningful enough so that we can bear the burden of mortal limitation without resentment, arrogance, corruption and malevolence. Life is not the constant shrinking away from the terror of death, hiding behind an easily pierced curtain of beliefs. Life is the forthright challenging of the insufficiencies that confront us, and the powerful, life-affirming existential meaning that such pursuit instinctively produces. It is
36
that which keeps the spectre of mortality at bay, while we work diligently, creatively, at work whose meaning is so powerful and self-evident that the burden of existence seems well worth bearing. Terror management, be damned! The path of the eternal hero beckons, and it is a doomed and dangerous fool who turns his back on it.

I think we have been able to box in the more unfortunate elements of the right. That's probably a consequence, mostly, of moral deliberations undertaken after World War II. We seem to have come to a pretty general consensus, I would say, that claims of ethnic or racial superiority place you outside the realm of acceptable political discourse. That's the cliff place, where dialog inevitably degenerates into conflict. I think the classic errors of the right are to fail to attend sufficiently to the tendency for hierarchies to degenerate into corruption, because of wilful blindness and rigidity-and, of course, that's something that the left takes the right to task for, generally speaking. So there's the hard line, which is ethnic identity as a mark of superiority, and then there's a looser line, where there's also error. I think the right errs in the same way that the left does, when they play identity politics. 

Generally, the way we're conceptualizing the political landscape is right to left, as a distribution. But there's another axis, which is, probably, collectivist versus individualist. And there's collectivist left-wingers and there's collectivist right-wingers. Insofar as the left-wingers and the right-winger are collectivist, then they're wrong. You see that on the right, with their claims of ethnic and national superiority. 

Well, you know, what happens in the United States, I think, is that anything that smacks of support for Trump is immediately associated with the alt-right. But the situation in the United States is way more complicated than that. The Americans have been split 50 per cent Democrat and 50 per cent Republican-like, as close to 50 per cent as it can possibly be-for four decades. So I don't see that the election of Trump indicates the rise of something approximating, even, right-wing populism in the United States. It's more complicated in Europe, because the border and immigration issues are much hotter topics in Europe. It seems, to me, that there is a rise of ethno-nationalist parties on the farther reaches of the right. 

Well, they were stunned at the fact that someone would pose that question. I sat there, and I thought about that for a long time, whether I would ask that question, because I knew I was jumping out of the game they were all playing. It's like, "well, you have to live with these people. Do you really think that they're all so stupid? Is that really your theory about why Trump was elected?" The whole Maher phenomenon is quite interesting, because he interviewed Ben Shapiro a while after that, and took everyone, including Shapiro, to task for the absolute stupidity of the catastrophe of Trump, without ever reflecting on the fact that clearly, in the United States, the liberal left lost the election. Trump didn't win. Everyone thought Hillary was going to win. She had it in the bag. She only needed 70,000 additional votes. If she wouldn't have played identity politics, she would have won. 

Well, there is a danger on the right: the identity politics danger. The right will play identity politics different than the left. The leftist theory is, "well, we should all segregate ourselves into our identity groups, and then those who are the oppressor groups should repent, and feel terrible for their oppressive acts, and step aside." That's one way of playing identity politics. Another way of playing identity politics is, "to hell with you. I will pick my identity group, based on race or ethnicity, whatever it is that I feel most comfortable with, since that's the game, and then I'll play to win." 

My sense is that there will be plenty of people attracted to the identity politics games that you win. The people who have gone after me from the right wing have basically gone after me for exactly that reason. They say, "Peterson stresses individuality and individual responsibility, but fails entirely to appreciate the fact that we do manifest ourselves in groups"-which is exactly the same thing that the radical leftists argue-and, "it's necessary for those of us who wish to preserve our culture, et cetera, to group together in our homogenous group, and act collectively to take our territory back." Something like that. 

That's very much a fascist perspective, fundamentally. But if the fundamental game is identity politics, it isn't obvious why the logical choice is to lose. When I discuss this, I tell people that the whole idea-that you should view the world through the lens that makes your collective identity paramount-is a pathology game, no matter who's playing it. It produces a reversion to divisive tribalism, and small, diverse tribes of people that mostly fight. 

Of course, the possibility that that might occur is partly why the left has objected to, you could say, IQ research, since, well, probably for the last 30 years. It's interesting, because when the IQ tests were first developed, they were developed in France, and then they were used in England for years by left-leaning parties. This was part of a conscious plan to produce upward social mobility; the idea that you could objectively assess intellectual prowess: allow the selection of, let's call them "deserving poor," using the Victorian or the Edwardian terminology, who were of great intellectual promise amongst the working class, and pull them up into the educated middle class, or elite, and that that would be of benefit to them and everyone else. 

The problem with IQ tests is that they do produce group differences, and that's unbelievably complicated and horrible. It's complicated because it isn't obvious how you should group people, if you're going to do group analysis of IQ. For example, there's more genetic diversity among Africans than there is among all the other human populations. So exactly how you put people in the bin of black, caucasian, and asian, let's say-which are generally regarded as the three major racial groups-is far from obvious. That's a basic scientific conundrum that's right at the bottom of the IQ problem. But if you use the typical groupings, you do get ethnic differences. That starts to become extremely problematic, because the question, then, is "why?" The answer to that is, "we don't know." 

You think, "well, the most commonly discussed ethnic difference is the propensity for people who are defined as black-the way that Americans define black-to perform more poorly on standardized tests." Then the accusation is that the tests are somehow biased, or that there's socioeconomic factors at work, or, perhaps, at the bottom of the desirability hierarchy, that there are biological factors at work. No one has nailed any of that down. If you give that data credence, then it leaves you with the terrible question of, "what do you do about those differences? And how do you conceptualize them?" It can also be used as a justification of a kind of racial hierarchy. But then, if you reverse it, you see the reverse problem emerging with the issue of Ashkenazi Jews, because they're overrepresented in most positions of competence, let's say, and authority-radically overrepresented, especially at the top. Unless you're willing to posit something like IQ differential that will account for it, you have to come up with a conspiratorial theory. This is the thing about IQ research: no matter how you interpret it, you're basically screwed. It's partly because the facts of the world don't necessarily line up with our a priori moral desires. 

One of the problems that I've been thinking about for a while-it's such an edge issue. I sort of fear it coming in, somehow, to a much more mainstream position, unless there's an attitude taken towards it. Obviously it seems that the left has been trying for a long time-and other people have-to keep it away. As you say, it's a bell curve, at least, and the time before that-just keep it away as a discussion. It's obviously bubbling away. So it seems, to me, that you have to find some attitude towards it. 

The fundamental problem is that the best predictor of long-term life outcome is IQ. That's a real problem. Now it's not that great a predictor. That's the first thing. If you're optimistic about IQ, you'd say that it predicts about 25 per cent in* the variants of long-term life outcome. Other factors, like conscientiousness, which is the next best predictor-it's a Big Five trait-accounts for about 9 per cent, 10 per cent. Something like that. So the two best predictors combined only account for 35 per cent of the difference in life outcome, leaving 65 per cent for other factors, which is quite a lot. So those factors could include things like prejudice and systemic bias, and so forth. But a lot of it's also luck, and health, and all the things that determine whether you fall off the edge of the world. 

The problem with IQ is that there's no damn way it's going away. People say, "well, IQ is not really a good measure of intelligence." It's like, "sorry, people. This is where it gets truly ugly." There is no phenomena in social sciences, period, that is on firmer statistical and conceptual footing than IQ. There's no phenomena that's more robust. If you give people a set of tests that assess abstraction, and then you measure their average score on the set of tests of abstraction, and then you rank order them, you have an IQ measured. That's all you have to do. The measure's no different than your average performance across a set of tasks that require abstraction. 

Right, right. OK, let's go into the IQ thing more terribly. IQ tests produce ethnic differences. You might say, "well, that constitutes a sign of bias." It's like, "OK, if that was true, then IQ tests, when you're using them to predict real-life performance within groups, they would under-predict the real-life performance of ethnic groups where IQ scores are lower. But they don't." There's no evidence of bias in terms of prediction. Now you could say, "well, that means the whole system is rigged. The IQ system is rigged, and the life outcome system is rigged." That would be, basically, the position of the egalitarian left. It's like, "fair enough. That could be the case." 

But there's another ugly thing that lurks here, too. Let's say that you decide that the way you're going to deal with the fact that there's ethnic differences in IQ, in the literature, is that you're going to throw IQ out completely, and not bother with it. Some universities are starting to do this, because they're throwing away tests like the SAT. People say that these standardized tests aren't IQ tests, but that's because they don't know what the hell they're talking about, because they're absolutely and clearly IQ tests. Any test that tests a reasonable set of questions of abstraction that you get a total score from, or an average, is an IQ test. 

So people can wave their hands about that all they want, but that just means they don't know what the hell they're talking about. So let's say we decided to just scrap the idea of IQ. Well, here's a problem. This is actually a problem Charles Murray and Herrnstein talked about in The Bell Curve. It was never really mentioned, though. It's actually an argument that the left should be very sensitive to. Our hierarchies are increasingly IQ predicated. And so what's happening is that the left is going to miss what's going to dispossess most people-that they are, hypothetically, concerned about-over the next 30 or 40 years. 

We're producing a cognitive hierarchy, and, increasingly, the spoils of the hierarchy are going to people who are in the cognitive stratosphere, so to speak. It's one thing to be really smart. It gives you an edge in a complex society, especially one that's changing very rapidly, like ours. But if you're really smart, and you know how to use a computer? You are so far ahead of people that it's like you're a member of a different species. If you don't think that's going to be the fundamental problem of the coming age, let's say, then you're not very awake. 

Personality. The funny thing, too, is that it's not that they're downgrading them on personality, because they don't use objective personality measures, which they could use. One of the things that's really cool about the Big Five, especially measures of conscientiousness-measures of conscientiousness do not produce ethnic differences. One of the ways of putting together a selection battery that's objective, let's say-which would mean both blind to peripheral characteristics such as race, but also capable of predicting the desired outcomes-is to produce a battery of tests that blends cognitive assessment with genuine personality assessment. 

Actually, it's so interesting, because in the American context, you're actually bound to do that by law. If you're selecting employees, you're bound to use the most valid and reliable current method of selection. That's instantiated into law. The American psychological association has stated firmly that the proper way to do that is to use a balance of cognitive tests and personality tests. But virtually no one does that, for all sorts of extremely complicated and absurd reasons. 

Now, then you might say, "well, we can't use the cognitive tests, because they produce ethnic differences"-and you can moderate that by interleaving personality, which is one way of dealing with it-"We're going to use something else." Well, it turns out that whatever else you use is more biased than the thing you're fleeing from. That's what's manifesting itself at Harvard. "Well, we'll use our subjective judgement." You know, the Harvard people have been hand waving about the fact that their bloody admission criteria are so sophisticated that you can't capture them with mere quantitative analysis. 

There's a variety of things that are appalling about that. One of them, of course, is the denial of the opportunity to attend a top-tier university like Harvard, for the students who were qualified to attend; the Asian students. But there's another element to this that's also, equally, pernicious, and, in some sense, more self-serving. If you set up your society properly-and this is the equality of opportunity doctrine-it's in everyone's best interest to exploit the talented maximally, right? In every domain of productive endeavour, a small proportion of people do most of the productive work. And so you want to take advantage of those people, those 1 in 1,000 people, or 1 in 10,000 people, who are mathematically gifted, for example, or gifted in whatever way they happen to be gifted. So if you don't select your top-tier candidate-so let's say the Asian students, in the case of Harvard-then society doesn't get a chance to exploit them properly, and everyone ends up poorer. Apart from the fact that each individual doesn't get their opportunity, there's a social cost, too, that is not trivial. 

Of course, the other issue is that the criteria are seen to be inequitable, because they actually are. That produces a terrible amount of cynicism about the institutions themselves. The horror of objective testing is that it's biased. The more profound horror is that, no matter what you replace it with, you replace it with something that's even more biased. So it's like, "well, good luck thinking your way out of that conundrum." 

Well, I think it's partly because intellectuals tend to be left leaning. The best predictor for leaning left is a trait called openness, which is associated, to some degree, with cognitive ability, but more importantly with creativity. Left-leaning people don't like boundaries between things, which is also why I think the left-leaning people can't draw boundaries within their own domain. They don't like borders, as we can certainly tell. They'd rather have the borders open. Why? Because the more open the borders are between things, the more opportunity there is for information flow. 

Left-leaning open people like information flow. They think, "well, the net benefit of free information flow is positive." It's like, "fair enough. But that doesn't mean that there should be no barriers between things," which is the conservative perspective. It's not only information that flows across open borders. All sorts of things flow across open borders. Things get muddy and confused, if there's no conceptual differences between people. So there's an argument between the right and the left about where the borders should be, and how porous they should be. That's an argument that always has to occur. 

The problem on the left is that clearly, clearly, absolutely, indisputably, if the right can go too far-and the evidence for that is the catastrophe of Auschwitz, the catastrophe of the Nazis. All that death and suffering is evidence of wrong, which is accepted by the left-then equal evidence exists that that can happen on the left. In fact, perhaps even more evidence. If you don't think the evidence is credible, then there's something wrong with you. 

Never. Never. And not in the education systems either. No one knows about it. The first time my students at the University of Toronto hear about what happened in the Soviet Union is in my personality class. It's like, "what the hell? First of all, really? In a personality class?" The reason I bring it up is because Solzhenitsyn drew an existential link between the failure of the individual psyche and the propensity for people to engage in the great lie, and the creation of these totalitarian states. So I view it as an extension of existential psychology and philosophy. That's how I slot it into my classes. But the students otherwise don't know. 

It's like, "oh, really? We had 100 million corpses pile up, and damn near put the entire planet to the torch, because of the tension between the West and the radical left. We're just going to sweep that under the rug, like that never happened?" It's very easy to be extremely annoyed about this, and even morally outraged. It's hard to avoid the temptation, but there is, actually, a technical problem here. It's one that the right is, perhaps, just as incapable of solving. This is the issue that you brought up. It's like, "OK, exactly when do things go too far on the left?" The answer is, "we don't know." It might be because there isn't a single issue on the left that marks out the degeneration into pathological ideology, like claims of racial difference that support the notion of superiority do on the right. 

Maybe it's a pathological combination of five good ideas. Something like that. I believe, now, that there's a nexus of ideas that mark out the left as too extreme: diversity, inclusivity, equity, white privilege-that's not a phrase I'm very fond of-and exaggerated claims of systemic racism. It's kind of like a mantra. It's something like that, as well as the verbiage around the oppressive patriarchy. Jesus, you know? That's a complicated box. There's an interaction between all those terms. You can make a case for diversity. Should all elementary school teachers be women? Well, perhaps not. Should all nurses be women? Perhaps not. Should all plumbers be men? Well, perhaps not. 

Well, there's a universalism about the communist ethos that definitely isn't there on the Nazi side. The Nazi claim is, "this is for us, and definitely not for you." The exclusionary principle is built right into it, right at the beginning, whereas on the communist side, at least in principle, if not in reality, the coming utopia was for everyone. There was the song of the brotherhood of man, and the idea that people could be included regardless of their origin. That seems like part of it. 

There's an evil built into the principle itself that the Nazis ran with, that is absent with the communists. But the truth of the matter is, to some degree, that it didn't matter, because the tally of bodies was equivalent on both sides of the equation. So even if there is a lack of a certain toxic principle at the outset of the communist doctrine, it doesn't make it one wit less catastrophic. It might even be worse, in some sense, because you can't put your finger on it. My sense is that a line crossed on the left is equality of outcome. It's part of the identity politics pathology. First of all, there's something wrong with construing the world as if your group identity is paramount. That's bad. That's a nonstarter. It's not so easy to exactly say why. 

 I think there's something crucial about that. One of the things that we will have to contend with is something like that, which is that every system is, in some sense, a system of oppression and bloodshed. But some of them also produce a modicum of wealth and happiness. I would say that's the proper defence of what has been established, as a consequence of the primacy of the individual in the conceptual schemes of the West: our bloody oppressive system, at least, produces some modicum of wealth and wellbeing, whereas the communist system produced, if you're an optimistic communist, no more deaths-which I believe is wrong-but zero wealth, and a tremendous amount of collateral destruction. 

It could easily be that we're in a position where all we have to choose from is horrible systems, some of which do some things right, now and then. That would be our system. That would be the Western system. I think there's plenty of evidence for that-accruing evidence. What's happening right now across the world is that, as the idea of individual sovereignty, and associated property rights, and freedom of choice, and so forth, are increasingly instantiated in developing countries, those countries are moving away from conditions of abysmal poverty at a staggering rate. 

The right-wing types have to admit that hierarchies do dispossess, and that they have their elements of brutality about them. Even if they're functional hierarchies, even if they're competence predicated, they dispossess people. This is the cognitive problem, in large part. It's going to bedevil us over the next 20 years. I mean, at least there are fewer people starving now. There are more people being lifted out of absolute poverty. Child mortality rates in Africa, now, match those in Europe in 1950. That's cause for celebration. We have halved the number of people in absolute poverty since the beginning of the millennium. So I think we have to grow up, and be realistic, and say, "well, yes: all human systems of governance and organization are pathological, to some degree. But some of them are minimally functional, as well." 

Well, it's been my experience as a clinician that, the more serious the events that you're discussing with people, the more the language shifts towards what you might describe as the religious. So, for example, post-traumatic stress disorder-that's a good example-or cases of serious child abuse or truly reprehensible interactions between people. They're best conceptualized with regards to a dialog about the nature of good and evil. In fact, with post-traumatic stress disorder, that's actually necessary, I believe. And I should say, in keeping with that, I've had a number of war vets come up to me after my recent talks and tell me that watching my lectures has cured their post-traumatic stress disorder, because I provided-and I've provided my clients with the same thing. Most people who develop PTSD and other catastrophic psychological reactions-not so much when something terrible happens to them, but when something terrible happens to them because of someone malevolent. Sometimes that malevolent person can be themselves. Soldiers, for example, often develop PTSD if they observe themselves doing something on the battlefield they did not believe was within their realm of action. It's as if the archetypal adversary leapt forward out of their soul and seized them, and acted for them on the battlefield. And then they're shattered by that; they can't believe they were capable of that. That destroys their sense of what it means to be human, and what being human means. 

That's more likely to happen to people who are somewhat naive, I would say-certainly that's the case with the PTSD literature. So, to treat someone in a situation like that, you have to help them develop a philosophy, I would say, but probably a theology of good and evil, because you have to investigate the structure of the motivation for malevolence. You can't do that outside the confines of religious language, partly because-this is a difficult thing to understand, and I think you have to have had contact with true evil in order to understand it: the fundamental motivation for the most malevolent actions is actually revenge against God. That's even the case if the people who are malevolent are atheist. It doesn't matter. In some sense, it doesn't even matter if God exists. The people who are acting malevolently act as if there is a sapient creator, who is responsible for this horrible mess, against whom revenge must be promulgated. The earliest literary example of that is in the Cain and Abel story, because Cain kills Abel-who is also his ideal-clearly to spite God, because his sacrifices were rejected. It's an unbelievably profound story, because that is exactly how people react when their sacrifices are rejected by God, for all intents and purposes. They become bitter and resentful, and look for revenge. The more vengeful they are, the more they enter the territory of absolute good and evil, rather than proximal good and evil. 

It's very helpful for people who have post-traumatic stress disorder to start to understand that sort of thing, because otherwise, they can't find a way out. So things have these levels of existence, theological at the bottom. That's where the battle for good and evil takes place, and where the power of the truthful word is most evident. Above that is philosophical, and, perhaps, above that is political, economical and sociological, and then familial, and then individual. Complicated things manifest themselves at all those level simultaneously, and you have to pick a level of analysis that's most suitable to formulate the problem. 

The proximal cause of my video production was the promotion of legislation to make compelled speech of a certain form mandatory. That produces two responses. One was a proximal response that the transgender activist community-a community which, by my estimation, in no way speaks legitimately for the transgender community. Many transgender people have told me precisely that, a substantial number of them, in well-written and well-formulated letters to me. I've received at least-I think it's up to about 35 letters like that, now. They went after me, along with the coterie of expected suspects: the LGBT activists and the radical leftists and so forth. They called me a transphobe and a racist, which is really something-I think it was because I made some disparaging comments about the leaders of Black Lives Matter in Toronto, who, believe me, deserve all the disparaging comments you could heap on them. That's a completely independent of the potential validity of the Black Lives Matters movement. I have said virtually nothing about that. So then the argument started, really, I suppose, in the media and online: Well, what the hell was going on? Was I just this bigoted, transphobic, fossil-dinosaur? or was something else happening? 

I believe, when I made the videos, that the legislation itself and the policies were signifying a crisis, a disjunction in Western society, of which the gender pronoun argument was only a tiny tendril. The fact that the videos received so much attention-and the aftermath of it, also-continues to reverberate with no decrease whatsoever in intensity, I would say... And this is like, what, six months later, seven months later? It's a long time. It's no 15 minutes. It's a long time. It's because I put my finger on a nerve. I've been thinking about why that was, because many people have decried political correctness, but they did it in generic ways. So here's a strange sequence of thoughts: There's this idea in Christianity that the word-that's associated with consciousness, I would say-is the mechanism by which chaotic potential is transformed into habitable order, and also the mechanism by which order that has become too rigid is dissolved and reconstituted. That's the basic element of the hero myth. The word, the logos, is a universally distributed eternal phenomena. But, in the Christian context, it's also been given a localization, so it's as if this universal principle-well, that's the word made flesh-was also instantiated in the local. There's a deep idea, there, which is that the universal lacks something. What it lacks is specificity. So in order to make the universal even more universal, you make it specific. 

And there is something about that. The movement, the encapsulation of the universal into the particular, is what produces reality. The idea's also expressed in the image of the genie, which is, of course, "genius". The genie is tremendous power encapsulated in a tiny space. The Christian idea of that-because one of the things that Christians were trying to figure out was, "how was the entire majesty of God able to instantiated itself into a human frame?" They had this idea they called "kenosis", which was the emptying of God. I think a modern person would think about that as the difference between a high resolution photo and a low resolution photo. So human beings are low resolution representations of God. That's one way of thinking about it. There's a profound idea lurking behind that, that we are not capable of formulating properly. It has something to do with the nature of consciousness, which is something we do not understand in the least. So, anyways, I think that what happened in my case, with the videos, was that I took this general problem, which is this philosophical and theological schism that's developed in Western culture, that's really destabilizing it in many ways. 

The New York Times had an op-ed yesterday about how the West has lost faith in its central mission. That was the New York Times, you know? But what I did was take that general problem and make it specific, because what I said was, "well, here's a law. It's a little law. It doesn't seem to effect many people, but it has an implication, and I'm not going to do it." And so it made-every global thing manifests itself in tiny, real places. People have asked me, "well, why did you pick that hill to die on?" Well, you have to pick a hill to die on. That's why-because reality manifests itself in the particulars. So, anyways... You asked about my family. Well, the most stressful period, I would say, was the first two months, because, as a unit, we've had some media experience. Not a tremendous amount, but enough so that we were reasonably familiar with it. But this was a clamorous onslaught, and, at the same time, the university, in its wisdom, decided to send me, first, one letter, telling me to stop doing what I was doing, which was actually, perversely, helpful; because I had made the claim, while making the video, that making the video was probably illegal under the pending legislation. 

Of course, people instantly accused me of overreacting-and then the university helpfully delivered me a letter, certainly informed by legal advice, stating that what I had feared about what I was doing was actually the case: that I was violating the university's principles of inclusion and diversity and also, likely, violating the provincial guidelines. I thought, "well, thank you very much. You proved my point." They also said that they'd been receiving many letters, from people claiming that I had transformed the campus into an unsafe space, without mentioning the fact that they were receiving hundreds and then thousands of letters and signatures supporting me, which I found... Once I got the letter, I mentioned it to the university administrators, and said, "you should take this letter back and rewrite it, so that you take both sides of the argument into the account. Present both sides, and then say that you've decided that you mean to discipline me. But don't omit half the story." No. There was no movement on that. 

Yeah, well, there's this dawning awareness that, out of a plethora of heroes, the ultimate hero will emerge. Think about this psychologically. Just think about it psychologically. Imagine that what human beings are trying to do is abstract out the ultimate patterns for modes of Being. So what they do is they look for admirable people, and then they make a story about an amalgam of admirable people-that would be a hero-and then the heroes' stories get amalgamated, so you get a meta-hero. Christ is a meta-hero. This is completely independent of any historical reality. That's a whole different issue. And I'm not denying any historical reality. That's a different issue. 

The Western imagination has been at work for a very long time, constructing up a meta-hero-and also his adversary-and clarifying the nature of those. That has been done in a sufficiently delineated way, so that it's produced a major impact on the manner in which our societies are constructed. The cornerstone of our society is respect for logos, and that's instantiated in the doctrine of respect for free speech. It's also instantiated in the doctrine that every individual has transcendent value, which I do believe is something that the West has developed to a far greater degree than any other culture that currently exists and probably ever existed. It's just such an unlikely concept. In the West, even if you're a murderer-even if people know you're a murderer-you still have intrinsic value. You have to be treated as if you have a spark of divinity within you. 

Well, when you asked that question, I had a vision. The vision was of a plane of barren earth with a gigantic crystalline structure underneath, forcing itself upward and breaking up the dirt. That's exactly how I would answer that question: there's this great idea attempting to manifest itself. It manifested itself, for example, in the decimation of slavery. There was an idea, and the idea was, "all men are created equal." That's the idea. That idea is rooted in a much deeper idea, which is that there's a spark of divinity in everyone, and that's this logos capacity that enables people to name things and give form to the world, and that we're not to violate that. You could say, "well, that emerged tremendously slowly," but it didn't emerge slowly at all, man. The idea's only, in its thoroughly formulated sense, about 2,000 years old. It emerged with incredible rapidity and demolished everything in its path, essentially. 

Now, the people who like to trace the development of the Western mind back to the Enlightenment and stop there would say that it was actually the Enlightenment, and that that ran counter to the overwhelmingly oppressive Christian dogma that was standing in its way. Of course, there's a certain truth to that, in that religious ideas, when formulated, can become restricted and dogmatic. There's a spirit and a dogma that are always in conflict, and both are necessary, because the dogma provides structure and the spirit provides transformation. But my reading of-see, I think I take a much longer time view than the typical Western Enlightenment philosopher, who tends to think-like Charles Taylor, when he went back to look at the sources of modern self, basically went back 500 years. But I think in evolutionary terms; that's a scratch on the surface. What we're talking about, here, is something that's indescribably deeper than merely what happened in the Enlightenment. I just see that, in some sense, as a sideshow of this crystalline process that's emerging. 

Nietzsche said that Christianity developed the sense of truth to such a degree that it died at the hands of its own construction. I think that's brilliant. I think it's absolutely the case. And so you can see the Enlightenment as part of that: the spirit of truth was highly developed, and that led people to start to criticize the very structure that had given rise to that desire for truth. And some of it's also philosophical confusion, in my estimation. It's like, once the rationalists and the empiricists got going, we started to formulate a very powerful doctrine of the objective world. That doctrine appeared to stand in opposition to the doctrine that was put forth by the Christian church-the mythological doctrine, let's say-if you assume that the mythological doctrine was a variant of that kind of empirical truth, which it wasn't. It was something completely different than that. 

It's more low resolution than confused. It's a morass in some sense, in that-you can see a cell through a 10x microscope. It would have to be a fairly big cell. But anyways, you look at a cell through a 10x microscope: Well, now you can tell that the thing is composed of cells. Well, it's still unclear, right? because the cell that you see is a low resolution cell. And then you zoom in and, "wow! This thing is made out of all these other things!" Then you zoom in more; it's like, "wow! There's a bunch more things there!" So part of the progress of human knowledge is the differentiation of the map. Now, you can get quite a long ways with an undifferentiated map. In fact, often an undifferentiated map is actually more useful, because it obscures useless detail. 

So we've always been making maps of the world. You might say that we were making maps of the objective world, even when we didn't know it. I would say, "no, we weren't. I don't believe that. We were making maps of Being, and that's not the same thing." Imagine that you exist within a sacred landscape. OK, just for the sake of argument, well, how could a modern person conceive of that? Well, that's easy: leave home for a while and then come back. Let's say it's your parents' home and you've been gone for 15 years, and you come back. Everything in the house is imbued with magical significance. You might say, "well, that's not inherent to the objects." It's like, "yeah, sure-depending on how you define the objects." It's completely inherent to the objects as they manifest themselves in your realm of perception, and you can dissociate the object itself from, let's call it, the subjective overlay. But that's not such an easy thing to do, and it's not so self-evident, and it's not even obvious that what you're doing when you do that is coming up with a more accurate picture of reality. The picture of reality that represents the item-let's call it an item of sentimental or sacred importance. How do you know that importance isn't the most important part of that item? That's how you act. You won't throw it away. "Well, why? It's just a material entity." It's like, "no, it's not. It's an element of Being, and that's a different thing." 

What people prior to the dawn of the materialist age, let's say, were doing was producing maps of Being. That meant that things had historical significance. The mountain where your grandfather was buried is not the same mountain as another mountain. You might say, "yes, they are. They're made out of the same clay and silica, and all of that." It's like, "yeah, man-you're missing the point." Now, a Westerner would say, "OK"-well, probably not, but a Westerner might object, "yes, but it's extraordinarily useful to differentiate, and to act as if there's an objective reality and a subjective reality, because it opens up all sorts of new avenues of pursuit." It's like, "yes, that's why we're technological wizards, but we've lost something." What we've lost is our capacity to understand the reality of that overlay that we scraped off in order to produce objective reality. 

That's it. Descartes' great investigation into doubt led him to the conclusion that "I think, therefore I am." I don't think by "think" he meant "think" the way we think. He meant more like, "the fact that I'm consciously aware is something that I cannot deny." That's good. That's fine. More power to Descartes for taking it to that extreme, and then producing what he produced out of that. But for me, when I investigated the structure of doubt, the conclusion that I drew was that there's nothing more real than suffering. I would say you can tell what people experience as real and believe, let's say, because their actions indicate that. People's actions indicate that they believe in their own pain. That's undeniable. You can't argue yourself out of it. It transcends rationality, and so it's real. And then, of course, it's an axiomatic tenant of religious systems, generally speaking, that life is suffering, which is a restatement of exactly the same thing. And so Being is the domain in which pain announces itself as real. That's not the material world. It's not the material world. Pain is not a material phenomena. You can say, "well, it's associated with material phenomena." It's like, "well, yes." I would like to point out that that is hardly a brilliant observation. Everything is associated with the material world, because here we are in this world. So it's a qualia, let's say, if you want to think about it from a philosophical perspective. 

They're also not taking their evolutionary argument seriously. These ideas are old, like really, really, old. They disappear back into the far reaches of time. I mean, if you look at Frans de Waal's work, for example, on dominance hierarchies in chimpanzees, there's this old idea that the dominant chimp-because chimps are quite patriarchal, as opposed to bonobos, but we won't bother with that for the time being. Chimps are quite patriarchal, and you might think, "well, the biggest, meanest, ugliest chimp wins. He's the king chimp. He's the one that gets to father all the baby chimps." Yes and no. Yes because sometimes it is the tyrant that rules the troop, but the problem with the tyrant is that two semi-tyrants can rip him into shreds, and they do, and with incredible brutality, and it disturbs the entire troop, when that happens. They'll tear off his genitals with their teeth. They'll rip off his skin. Chimpanzees are super strong. They're about six times as strong as the most well-conditioned man. They can break 300-pound test steel cable with their bare hands. They are super strong, and they have absolutely no restraint whatsoever on their aggression, except the reactions of their conspecifics. So don't mess with chimpanzees. 

Brute rule is unstable among chimpanzees. What's more stable? Well, the more stable rulers are-they pay attention to the females; they facilitate social interactions; they reciprocate; they have friends and allies; they maintain their friendships and their formations of alliances. And so, their rule stabilizes, and it's because they're acting out what you might describe as the beginnings of an archetypal pattern. They're acting as culture heroes for the chimps. That means that they have to be acting in a manner that's commensurate with the interest of the group, as well as acting in a manner that's commensurate with their own interest. The chimps are starting to act that out. The wolves act that out. The rats act it out. Like, when two rats engage in rough-and-tumble play, two juvenile rats-which they will work to do-if one rat is bigger than the other by about 10 per cent, that gives him the kind of weight advantage that makes him able to pin the other rat in the wrestling match pretty much about 100 per cent of the time. But if you pair those rats repeatedly, if the big rat doesn't let the little rat win, at least about 30 per cent of the time, the little rat will stop asking him to play. 

There's a morality that emerges out of the necessity of social interaction. OK, so let's say a morality emerges out of the necessity of social interaction. OK, that's not a particularly contentious statement. But let's say that's been true for hundreds of millions of years, ever since the dominance hierarchy emerged. That's about 350 million years ago. There's ways of comporting yourself within the dominance hierarchy that allow for your survival and the possibility of your victory. OK, so that's the beginnings of morality. Because the dominance hierarchy is so ancient, it actually acts as a selection mechanism. You see that in human beings. You see that in all mammals. The females use the dominance hierarchy-not in every mammalian species, but in most-to peel off the top. The successful climbers are the ones that leave the most offspring. So we've been shaped immensely by the necessity of acting morally within the social space. And so there's an optimal manner of interacting with a dominance hierarchy, and then that becomes the environment, that selection mechanism. And then, the organisms are selected by that. That morality becomes structurally part of us, as well. Then there's this concordance between our felt sense of moral obligation and the demands of the social world, and that's real. It's as real as anything, especially if you're a Darwinian, because what's most real from the Darwinian perspective is that which selections. That is what's most real. That is the definition of real. It's not the material world. It's not. It's that which selects, and that's far broader than the mere material world. 

Well, it's real in that it accounts for emergent properties. It's not a simple thing to reduce, well, consciousness, to its material substrate. But complex forms of social interactions aren't easily reduced in a causal manner to the material substrate. I mean, we can't draw causal links. We just don't have that level of sophistication, and perhaps never will. So the reality of the processes that make up social interactions among social animals can't be reduced to the material substrate, but they're real, and they're so real that they select. So they're real. This is the problem I have with the people who are simultaneously reductionist materialists and evolutionary biologists. It's like, "sorry, guys: you don't get to be both." That's the argument I was trying to have with Sam Harris, which augured in very rapidly in the first discussion, and I thought proceeded adequately well in the second discussion. Sam thinks that you can get the facts to speak moral truths for themselves. He also has this theory that we should be attempting to maximize wellbeing. But I'm not going to deal with the second claim at all, because the devil's in the details, there, with how you measure wellbeing. Our ability to measure wellbeing is catastrophically unsophisticated, to say the least. The wellbeing scales that we have are extroversion minus neuroticism. That's a big problem for someone who wants to do scientific measurement: it's like, "OK, we're going to increase wellbeing." "Hey, no problem. How are you going to measure it? and whose wellbeing? mine? OK, mine now? mine next week? mine next month? mine in a year? how about 10 years? how about 50?" 

There are a variety of things that contribute to success, let's say, and one of them is force. We won't talk about power, because "power"... Force: force is when I get you to do something you wouldn't choose to do. You could say, "the person who's best at doing that is the winner." I would say, "no, that's wrong. That isn't how the evidence stacks up." The problem with being the person who gets the other person to do something by force is you have to enforce it, and that's costly, and you can be killed; you can be overthrown. Even the most effective tyrannies suffer during times of power transition. It's unstable. That's the problem: a hierarchy built on power is unstable. It isn't operating as a consequence of the will of the masses. 

Piaget, the developmental psychologist, thought about this in depth. He believed, from a biological perspective, that you could think about it as two importantly different categories of games. One is the set of games that I make you play, and then, the other is the category of games that you and I play voluntarily. And then you might say, "let's have a competition between those two sets of games. We'll orient both of them towards the production of a certain goal. Let's say a stable civilized society, for the sake of argument-including one in which some people can be very, very wealthy and powerful, because, of course, that's what the tyrant wants. We're going to put them head-to-head." Piaget said, "look, the voluntary game society will win, because it doesn't accrue enforcement costs." It's brilliant. That was part of how he formulated the equilibrated state, as something like... You might describe it as a particularization of the kingdom of God. That's one way of thinking about it. I think that's fair, when talking about Piaget, because what motivated Piaget throughout his entire life-and people don't know this about Piaget, generally speaking-was the reconciliation of science and religion. That's what drove him. 

Sure: peekaboo with an infant. The infant can play peekaboo, and what happens when you play peekaboo with an infant is that, very rapidly, by gesturing, you and the infant settle on the rules of the game. What you want to do is engage the infant in play, because you find that intrinsically rewarding. So the infant will look at you, and then if you smile, he'll smile, generally speaking. You can tell if the infant's in a playful mood, and then you can hide your face, and you calibrate that so you don't startle the infant. You want to put the infant on the border of order and chaos, because that's where the fun is. And so you play with hiding and re-manifesting yourself, and it produces delight in the infant. So what you've done, there, is spontaneously organized a tiny societal microcosm. 

That's the sort of thing that Piaget was interested in: he was interested in how children organize games. The games are tiny societies: everyone agrees on the rules, and they play them out. They're microcosms of society, and, as the children transform, the confines of the game expand until the game and the social world are indistinguishable. It's like the life of a pro football player. Is that real life, or is that a game? Well, at some point, the game is life. Then the question is, "well, what should the game be?" Piaget's answer was, "well, the game should be one that everyone agrees to play." There's more to it than that, and some of my development of Piaget's ideas is that there's a bunch of rules of the games-and this is why the postmodernists, by the way, are wrong about the infinity of interpretations. They're wrong. There is an infinity of potential interpretations, but there isn't an infinity of viable interpretations, and that's the critical issue. So what constrains the range of interpretations? Well, let's say there's an infinite number of ways of construing the world. Well, there are, and that's a game the postmodernists take: not only can you interpret texts in an infinite number of ways, but the world is a text, and it can be interpreted in an infinite number of ways, and so you can't define any particular mode of interpretation as canonical. That's the fundamental claim. 

OK, let's take that apart. Wrong. First of all, my interpretations have to keep me going-also shouldn't result in an excess of agony, because those are games I'm not going to play. So if I extract out an interpretation like a hot stove is something upon which I can rest my hand, my agony will tell me that that's a nonviable solution. It isn't just agony: it's the whole panoply of things that produce suffering: hunger, thirst, temperature regulation, the necessity of illumination, sexual desire-all these built-in biological modules that are part and parcel of our evolutionary history, which postmodernists are forced to deny, partly because it undermines their theory and partly because it interferes with their sociocultural determinism and their Marxism. But the biological evidence is quite clear. This is why our concordance with animals is so tight that you can use antidepressants on lobsters, and we diverged from lobsters about 300 million years ago: there's conservation like you wouldn't believe. So we're made up of biological modules, and they have their own worldview. The hunger system has a worldview; the pain system has a worldview, and the pain system is a dominating system. You mess with that thing, it'll flatten you. 

Precisely. So, first, we'll say that we're subject to biological constraints. And then, we're subject to temporal biological constraints, which is that not only are we hungry today, but we're going to be hungry tomorrow, and we're going to be hungry in a year. So the biological constraints are now and later. The solution has to solve both those sets of problems, but that's only the beginning, because I have those problems, but I also have the problem that there you are, and you have those problems. And so then we either fight, which is a problem, or we mutually negotiate such that we generate a solution, such that you get to solve your problems at the same time that I get to solve my problems-or maybe we even do it better: you get to solve your problems in a manner that helps me solve my problems, and I do the same for you. 

That's not easy. That's narrow, and you know that, because if you live with someone, you're constantly arguing with them, and the argument is, "which interpretation will suffice?" Right. And so, no, there's not an infinite number of interpretations. There's hardly any. But then it isn't just me and the person I live with: it's me and the person I live with, and the family, and the family and the community, and the community and polity, and the economic system, and the biological system. All of that has to be stacked up, one on top of the other. So the game is played at every level, simultaneously, the same way. In my estimation, that's what a symphony expresses. That's what it's telling you. It's stacked the level of Being so that every level operates harmoniously with every other level. I would also say that, because we're evolved for that, we can tell when it's happening, and that's what the sense of meaning is. The sense of meaning is our third eye, you could say. Your eyes blind you, because they only see what's here right in front of you now. They blind you. 

You have to use modes of perception that transcend mere vision in order to conceptualize Being properly. One of those modes is the sense of meaning and engagement. That involves extraordinarily ancient systems. For example, it's produced in part by the dopaminergic systems, and they're rooted in the hypothalamus, which is an extraordinarily old part of the brain, and a very, very-maybe the-most fundamental part of the brain. It's the one where most of the biological subsystems have their rootings: the hunger systems, and the lust systems, and that sort of thing. And so the sense of meaning is extremely old-old, old, old. But it's differentiated very finely in human beings. When you're engaged meaningfully, then what that is, is an intimation that the levels of Being are lining up, at least to some degree. You'll feel that. You'll feel that as a sense that life is meaningful. That sense is the thing that enables you to overcome tragedy. 

Yeah, but I don't think that is what he experiences. I think he's driven substantially by terror and malevolence, and that's not the same thing. It's not like those things aren't motivating. I'm not saying that this sense of transcendent meaning is the only motivator. Clearly it's not. There's sub-motivational systems that can take control at any time. But I don't believe that the sense of meaning that I'm describing is akin to what a tyrant feels when he's tyrannizing. That's more like jealous rage, or something like that-or resentment. Now, I would say there's an exception to that, because one of the things we haven't talked about is the necessity for truth. So let's allow, for a moment, that the faculty that produces this sense of engagement has the qualities I attributed to it. But I would say that also only works properly under certain conditions, which is, if you are sick-physically, biological, neurological-then it's certainly possible that that meaning system is going to go astray. It's going to signify meaning where the alignment isn't proper. Well, that could happen for any number of reasons. It seems to happen in schizophrenia, for example, at a very, very low level. 

I would also say, you risk making that happen to you-which means you can no longer trust your deepest instinct-by lying to yourself. So that could be selective omission of information. That's the most common form of lie: passive avoidance; willful blindness. That's the most common form of deception, although, active deceit can also play a role. If you contaminate the structure of your Being with false information, with deceptive practices, and you wilfully blind yourself, then you're going to be led astray by your sense of meaning. You're going to pathologize it. Part of the issue, here, is that you don't want to interfere with your ability to see, because you'll wander off the road into the ditch. People think, "well, why should I tell the truth?" which is a great question, man. Every smart kid figures that out-the smarter the kid, the younger they figure that out: "well, if I can lie to get what I want, why shouldn't I, given that I want to get what I want?" That's a great question. 

Right, but he wants to do that anyways; he just wants to do it in the reverse. I was making the case that, by necessity, factual truth is subordinate to moral truth. He was saying, "no, moral truth can be derived from factual truth." He doesn't get out of the problem. The problem is the necessary coexistence of both forms of truth. He just inverts the causal order. The problem with Sam's account is that-and this is the problem that Immanuel Kant identified so many years ago: "do the facts speak for themselves?" "No, they don't, because facts say a number of different things." If there's a field in front of you, it does not tell you which path to take through it. But it's worse than that: there's an unlimited number of facts, and the problem is, "how do you select them?" The answer to that is, "the facts themselves cannot tell you that," and that's why you have an a priori interpretive structure, which is, of course, what Kant was insisting upon. Sam doesn't take that into account, and that's mind-boggling to me, because that a priori interpretive structure is the sum total of the effect of our evolutionary history. So what about that? Where does that play into the game? We're so selective in our attention, it's unbelievable. There's been estimates that the bandwidth of our conscious attention is like four bits. We're like pinpointing the world. Some of that's conscious, because we can make decisions about what we look at, and a lot of it's unconscious, because our attention is attracted by, directed by, these fundamental underlying biological subsystems. But we're making intrinsic value judgements all the time that are not derived from the facts at hand. That's a blank slate viewpoint. Harris can't be a blank slate believer if he's an evolutionary biologist, and the same goes for Dawkins. 

Well, that's part of the fact that we're not transparent to ourselves. People like Gazzaniga have made the claim-and think Dennett has really been hitting this hard lately-that mostly what our conscious mind does is come up with post hoc rationalization for our behaviours. It's like, just because something's partly true some of the time doesn't mean that it's absolutely true all of the time. We are trying to understand ourselves continually, and sometimes we come up with partial accounts for why we did what we did. But consciousness is also the builder of our habits. Now, it's not the only builder, but you consciously attend to some action in a new domain and practice it. The consciousness builds up those habitual structures, and then they run automatically. But that doesn't mean that consciousness was irrelevant to their production. It was very relevant to their production. It's not just a mere post hoc add on. It's not that at all. Consciousness is what-you're playing a sonata, and you make a mistake. You play it again, you make the same mistake. What do you do? You're playing it automatically. You've built the habit with hours and hours of practice and conscious attention. You've rewired yourself, building automatic mechanisms. An automatic mechanism fails, so what do you do? You look more intently at the notes, then you slow down, and you restructure the habit, and then you speed up, you speed up, you speed up. Then you play the segment, then you play the segment again, and then maybe you go back to the beginning and zip through. Then you've restructured that automatic system. 

Consciousness did that. It's not just a post hoc rationalizer-although, it can be that-and it's often not a rationalization, either: sometimes it's an investigation into the actual causal structure. It's like, "I did that. Why'd I do it? Well, sometimes I want to come up with a story that sounds good to other people," let's say, which seems to be Gazzaniga's theory about why we consciously utter post hoc rationalizations to justify our behaviours to ourself. Jesus, that's pretty cynical. Often, it's a deep attempt to identify the likely causal contributors. You could say, "we just don't have that capacity." It's like, "yes, we do, because otherwise we would continually repeat the same mistakes." If we learn from our experience, what we do is reconstrue our maps of value, so that we don't replicate the error in the future. And because we are capable of not replicating past errors, obviously we're capable of consciously altering our pathway, and also of performing a pragmatically useful causal analysis of the cause of our error. 

Now, if you do psychotherapy with people and they have a traumatic memory, it won't go away. Well, what do you do with it? You go back into the memory, and you assess the sequence of events in detail until they have an account that is sufficiently plausible, so that they believe that, if the same circumstances arose in the future, they would no longer fall prey to that error. So, for example, if it's a naive person who was manipulated badly by a potential romantic partner, then what you do is, you say, "what was it about your viewpoint that put you at risk?" That isn't blaming the victim. It's helping the victim not be a victim again. It's like, "yeah, it was 95 per cent the other person's fault-whatever. They're not in the room with you. All you can do is try not to fall into the same pit. That didn't mean someone else didn't dig the pit." "OK, I was too trusting." "So let's take that apart. What do you mean, 'too trusting?'" "Well, I always assume the good in people." "Well, what about these instances of people acting in a bad way?" "Well, I don't really understand that." See, they need to differentiate up their worldview, to take into account the existence of predatory people. They also, generally, have to differentiate their view of themselves, to stop thinking of themselves as nice and harmless, because it's the nice and harmless naive person that's exploitable by the malevolent psychopath, and that's not moral virtue. That's just weakness. That's all it is. It's naivety. It's the maintenance of a childlike view of the world, far past its expiry date. 

So you go back and take that apart. You formulate a more differentiated and sophisticated view of the world. The person finds that plausible, then you have them practice it, so they can see that it has applicability in the real world. And then, the emotion from the traumatic memory will go away. What's happening is the anxiety system is saying, "unexplored territory! Unexplored territory! Unexplored territory!" What that system wants is to know, A, that someone is trying to map that territory instead of just avoiding the problem, and B, that there is a plan. Now, it's not cognitively sophisticated enough, in some way, to know if the plan works. It wants to know that someone's in charge, and that it's being taken care of. That's what you do in psychotherapy. You say, "look, you can face this. Even though you think you can't, you can. We'll break it into pieces. I'll discuss with you a plethora of potential solutions. We can do it slowly. You can bite off as much as you can chew and no more. And we're going to come up with something that isn't a post hoc rationalization for your behaviour: it's a set of new tools, so that when you see that hole in the road, you walk around it. First of all, you'll see it. Second, you'll walk around it." People are massively encouraged by that process. They're not made less afraid. In fact, they might be made more afraid. But the fear is much more focused, and they know how to deal with it. It's like, "I didn't think there were dangerous people in the world!" "Well, there are." "Oh, my God! The world's much more dangerous!" It's like, "yes, it is." "Well, what am I going to do about that?" "You're going to get smarter and sharper, because that's the cure. It's not, 'we're going to make the world less dangerous.' The world is plenty dangerous, but it turns out you're a lot more capable than you thought." 

Of course. Of course it is, and self-deception in all sorts of ways: self-deception as a consequence of implicit biases, temperamental biases. Your capacity to think-let's say that's your self-reflective logos-is limited by your ability. So it's limited by your motivations and their purity, let's say. It's limited by your knowledge. It's limited by your localization in this particular period of time and place. And so it's insufficient, and you can tell it's insufficient because problems arise in your life that you can't solve. Well, so then what you do is engage very frequently in joint problem solving. And then you might say, "well, what makes a person particularly, let's say, powerful, influential, able to function well in the social hierarchy?" "That's easy: they solve problems." That's what they do. If you come to someone with a problem, and they say, "well, here's how you deal with that," you're pretty happy about that. You'll come back and see them again. It doesn't matter what the avenue is. That's what a mechanic does: "This doesn't work." "I'll fix it." It's like, "hey! Right on, man. I'm bringing my car back there." So we're pretty good at evaluating whether or not a problem has been addressed, because the problem goes away, so then we're happy about that, because we don't want the problem. 

People often ask me, "do you believe in God?" I don't like that question. First of all, it's an attempt to box me in, in a sense. The reason that it's an attempt to box me in is because the question is asked so that I can be firmly placed on one side of a binary argument. The reason I don't like to answer it is because, A, I don't like to be boxed in, and B, because I don't know what the person means by "believe" or "God", and they think they know. The probability that they construe "belief" and construe "God" the same way I do is virtually zero. So it's a question that doesn't work for me on multiple levels of analysis, but, strangely enough, just as we were talking, the answer to that question popped into my head: I act as if God exists. 

Now, you can decide for yourself whether that means that I believe in him, so to speak, but I act as if he exists. That's a good enough answer for that. Then, with regards to these other issues, the divinity of Christ, I would say the same problems with the question formulation obtain. What do you mean by "divine"? and what do you mean by "Christ"? These are very, very difficult questions. Now, for all intents and purposes, I believe the logos is divine. If by "divine" you mean of ultimate value, of ultimate transcendent value: yes, it's divine. It's associated with death and rebirth, clearly, because the logos dismantles you and rebuilds you. That's what happens when you make an error. 

When you make an error, some part of you has to go. That's a sacrifice. You have to let it go. Sometimes it's a big part of you. Sometimes it can be such a big part of you that you actually die, instead of dying and being reborn. "Is there something more than merely metaphorical about the idea of dying and being reborn?" "Yes, there is, because those are associated with physiological transformations." "What's the ultimate extent of that?" That's a good question. The question is, "what happens to the world around you, as you increasingly embody the logos?" The answer to that is, "we don't know." We don't know the ultimate level of this. Now, the hypothesis is-and it's a hypothesis that extends, to some degree, to Buddha, as well. The hypothesis is that there has been one or two individuals who managed that, and that in their management of that, they transcended death itself. Well, then you might ask yourself, "what do you mean by 'transcended death?''" Well, in the case of Christ, let's assume he was a historical figure for the time being-which, I think, is the simplest thing to assume.mI think there is sufficient evidence to conclude that. You could conclude otherwise, but, personally, I feel that there is sufficient evidence to conclude that. Is his resurrection real? Well, his spirit lives on. That's certainly the case. 

let's imagine that a spirit is a pattern of Being. We know that patterns can be transmitted across multiple substrates, right? Vinyl, electronic, impulses, air, vibrations in your ear, neurological patterns, dance: it's all the translation of what you might describe as a spirit. It's that pattern. It's independent of its material substrate. Well, Christ's spirit lives on. It's had a massive effect across time. Well, is that an answer to the question, "did his body resurrect?" I don't know. I don't know. The accounts aren't clear, for one thing. What the accounts mean isn't clear. I don't know what happens to a person if they bring themselves completely into alignment. I've had intimations of what that might mean. We don't understand the world very well. We don't understand how the world could be mastered, if it was mastered completely. We don't know how an individual might be able to manage that. We don't know what transformations that might make possible. 

I'm going to do a series on the Bible. That's one of the things I want to investigate more thoroughly and formulate my thoughts about more thoroughly, because it is a crucial issue. A friend of mine said-and I wouldn't describe him... He's certainly not the sort of person that you would describe as a classic Catholic. He's an extraordinarily well-educated individual. He's come back to Christianity with the most vicious of internal battles. This is the same person who made the comments earlier about the dominance hierarchy, so he's very insightful. He said, "it falls apart unless you believe in the divinity of Christ, and in the resurrection of Christ." He meant that in a very fundamental way. There's a way in which that's true, but I don't know exactly what it means yet. The metaphorical element of that, to me, is quite clear: the death and rebirth idea? Yeah. You see that echoed all over. One of the most recent popular manifestations of that idea is in the Harry Potter series, because it's full of deaths and rebirths of the central hero. 


I think the solution is an individual one, because the other solutions are collective, and the collective solutions are, in some sense, the problem. Now, why do people become ideologically possessed? Well, some of it's just confirmation bias, temperamental bias. Then you can add ignorance to that; then you can add wilful blindness to that. And, with the ignorance issue, you can, more specifically, diagnose historical ignorance. That's why I recommend that people read The Gulag Archipelago, for example. There's things that we need to know in order to set ourselves right, and the people that I've found that have been most useful in that regard have been Dostoevsky and Nietzsche and Carl Jung, and a smattering of others. I think they had their finger on the pulse, fundamentally. It's not like they're the only people. I'm not claiming that at all. But there's deeper issues, too. 

One of the deeper issues is, "what do you do with the responsibility?" If you're an ideolog, then the bad people are those who don't think like you. That's really convenient. Not only do you not have to do anything about it-because you're already on the side of the good, so it's alleviated you of any moral responsibility. Yet, you can still act as if you're the exemplar of morality itself. Plus, you have a target, now, for all the unexamined vengefulness and hate and corruption in your own heart. So that's a tempting plethora of temptations. It's easy; it's quick; it's handed to you. It means that you don't have to adopt any responsibility. It means you can camouflage yourself as a moral agent. It means that you have a target for your hatred, and it's a justifiable target. But I think, of all of those issues, the avoidance of responsibility is the cardinal issue. It's the most important issue. What I see at the universities is that the students are taught to go out and protest: "there's the people who are messing up the planet. Go tell them that they're bad." You don't offer a solution, even; you just tell them that they're bad. It's like, "that's the pathway to achievement." "No, it's not." 

Yes. I would say, "stop saying things that violate your conscience," instead of, "stop saying things that you know to be untrue," because we run into the truth problem. Here's another idea: stop saying and doing things that make you feel weak. All you have to do is pay attention to that. Some things that you do will make you feel disintegrated. It's a physiological sensation: disintegrated and weak. It's something that Carl Rogers commented on. He thought about that as part of... Well, I can't remember the word. Something like "integrity", but that isn't the word he used. But some things improve your integrity and some things disintegrate you. Now, the things that disintegrate you, you often do to impress other people, or because you're taking a shortcut, or you're escaping what you know to be your moral obligation, and your moral obligation stems naturally from your aims. 

Once you have aims, you have moral obligations. They come together, because the moral obligation is what you need to do to obtain the aim. And if you don't have an aim, then you're aimless. That's not a solution. So along with the aims come the moral obligations. Then, when you violate the moral obligations, you'll have a sense of that violation: "well, you have to stop doing that." Or that's something you could do. You don't have to. You don't have to do anything of this, but that's where, I would say, people should start. You think it's small, but it's not small. I had a girl come up to me last night at the end of my talk, and this happens all the time. She said, "I started cleaning up my room last year, and it completely changed my life." She said, "your room is an externalization of your mind," and that's right. That's exactly true: to the degree that you're in your room, the room is you. Now, that isn't how people think, but that's OK. It doesn't matter if they think that way; that's how it is. So straighten up what you can straighten up and quit saying things that make you feel weak. Then you'll know what to do next. 

Well, it's the polarization, eh? The polarization is disturbing. What I try to recommend to people-and I did in my talk last night, for example-is that they find someone that they don't agree with and have a conversation with them. Now, it has to be someone that you can have a conversation with, but a lot of that will just involve listening. We have to extend out hands across the gap, because otherwise we'll polarize. That's what's happening. You saw it in Berkley last week. That could be just the beginning, and there's lots of people who would like that. That's not a good idea. It's a very bad idea. It's still my estimation that, at the moment, it's the radicals on the left that are primarily responsible for this, and they're primarily responsible particularly because of their stance on free speech. Like, I can't go to Linfield College now. Some arbitrary administrator used a specious excuse to say, "no, he can't come," even though I was invited. I was already invited. I already paid for the air fare. They feel there is a large coterie of people who feel that it's in their bailiwick to determine who can speak, and that's a very bad idea. 

Well, I would say that I'm trying to do that on an ongoing basis. I mean, right from the beginning, after the first video went roughly viral, I have a group of friends, who span the political spectrum, who stood by me, let's say, as well as my family, and I'm talking to them constantly about what I'm doing wrong. I have learned, to some degree, how to harness part of the energy of anger, as a source of energy. Now, that has its advantage and disadvantages. Its advantage is a certain kind of forcefulness. It's also a good suppressor-a good competitor for fear, because anger suppresses fear. The feedback I've received is that, the more reasonable I am, the better. That, of course, makes sense. And then, there's been plethora of small and specific criticisms, and I've tried to attend to them as carefully as I can. 

I've been in this situation, especially for the first four months, where, had I said one thing that was self-evidently non-credible, that would have justified a claim of bigotry or racism or any of those things, I would have been sunk. I wouldn't say I'm pleased with my performance, because it isn't a performance, and it isn't something to be pleased about or displeased about. But I can say that, to the degree that it's possible, I've done my best to do what I said I'm doing, which is to say what I think as clearly as I can. That's all I'm trying to do. When I go in front of people, I'm not trying to convince them of anything. I'm really not. It's up to them. I don't want to convince people of something. They're responsible for their own suffering. I don't want to manipulate their destinies. I don't believe that I know enough about the particularities of their life to dare to do that. 

What I do when I speak to people is try to formulate my thoughts on that particular topic more clearly. That's my lecture style. I'm thinking. I'm not delivering a prepackaged talk. I mean, now and then I'll write it, but that's only when I'm developing a really new idea and it has to be a structured argument. I've only done that in like three of my YouTube videos. It's very rare. Most of the time, I have a skeleton: there's the argument; there's the skeleton outline. I see where I'm going, to get from point A, to B, to C. And then, when I'm talking, like today, it's an exploration. It's not, "here's what I think. It's right, and you should believe it." It's like, "no! I'm trying to rectify my errors and extend what I know, when I'm speaking and when I'm listening." I think that genuinely is what I'm doing, and I genuinely don't want to give people advice. It's something I've learned, not least by being a psychotherapist. It's like, "your destiny is not mine to mess with. I don't want to be responsible for your decisions. What if I'm wrong?" 

Oh, they're a group of people, mostly on the net, who've been burned in their relationships, or who conceptualize themselves as having been burned in their relationships; and they believe that the legal structure, in particular in Western countries, is so tilted against men, particularly in family dispute situations and divorce settlement, that it's safer for men to not establish permanent relationships with women, not to cohabit with them, ever. They're a large movement. Now, how large they are, I don't know. But they're large enough, and they have what I regard as an undue influence over relatively bitter and resentful young men, who haven't had great success in the dating market, and who are looking for a rationale to write off all women, because they're so hurt by their continual rejection. 

That's not good for those young men. And so the reason I disparaged the Men Going Their Own Way is because I had seen the pernicious effect-these are often older guys-of their world-weary philosophy on young men. Now, these guys think that they're just warning them, and they are warning them, but they're not "just" warning them. The reason I regret calling them "pathetic weasels" is because they also have a point. I do believe that the court systems are staggeringly anti-male-absurdly, horribly anti-male. I've seen my own clients, some of them who were really, really decent, hardworking, family-oriented people, demolished by the court systems. So the Men Going Their Own Way have a point, and I'm sorry I called them "pathetic weasels," but I outlined my reasons. So, yes, I do regret that. I have to be careful, because I do have a dark, satirical sense of humor, and I can utter epithets, let's say, for the sake of punctuating a point, while simultaneously forgetting that 150,000 people will listen to it. So I regret that. 

Other than that... I'm judging my behaviour on the degree to which my trajectory is upward, and I believe that I have responsibly improved the articulation of my arguments with every iteration of them; and I think that, had that not been happening, I would have been taught a very serious lesson, because there were plenty of people-and still are-who would be perfectly happy to see me be taught a very serious lesson. It's quite terrifying. I'm on a tightrope. It's not as much a tightrope as it was, but for a long time, for months, had I said anything erroneous or insufficiently careful, I would have been in trouble-and, had anybody dug up anything I said in the past. That's worked in my favour, because, of course, when I made these public pronouncements, there was already 500 hours of videos online. And so, had I been a reprehensible individual... Unless I was capable of deceit that far exceeds the average, there would have been some line, somewhere, in one of the videos that I made, when I was having an off day, where I said something that could be taken out of context and used to smear me. but that hasn't happened, and I think the reason that hasn't happened is because-touch wood-those utterances actually don't exist. 